# This is the encyclopedia of POWDER
# "# " prefixed lines are comments.
# 
# Entries should be of the form:
#
# MOB::FIREBEETLE fire beetle
# 	The fire beetle spits two streams of liquid which, when
# 	combined, ignite.

GOD::AGNOSTIC - no one god
    Gods?  Let them come to me!

    Adventurers worship no one god.  This leaves them safe from their
    meddlings, but also unable to reap the gifts that fall to the
    faithful.

    Followers have no special conducts.

    Followers receive +5/+5 per level.

GOD::FIGHTER - Klaskov
    Klaskov the Ironclad is the patron deity of fighters.  He is best
    known for the burnished set of full plate he wears into any
    battle.

    Followers are encouraged to kill, and dress well.
    
    Followers are discouraged from casting spells.
    
    Followers receive +15/+0 per level. 

GOD::WIZARD - Belweir
    Belweir the Near Sighted is the patron deity of Wizards.  Belweir
    incorporates in the form of a large rock mole.  Belweir's
    knowledge of mystical matters exceeds all other beings.

    `Know what is in front of you before seeking that afar.'

    Followers are encouraged to cast spells, identify things, and dress well.

    Followers are discouraged from melee combat.

    Followers receive +0/+15 per level.

GOD::ROGUE - Quizar
    Quizar the Black is the patron deity of rogues.  On the mortal
    plane, Quizar takes the form of a large black squirrel.

    Followers are encouraged to attack from afar, identify items, find
    secrets, dress well, and strike the helpless.

    Followers are discouraged from making a lot of noise.

    Followers gain +10/+5 per level.

GOD::NECRO - Tlosh
    The Arch-Lich Tlosh is the patron deity of necromancers.  Though
    not technically a god, Tlosh's power is such that few argue the
    point.

    Followers are encouraged to kill at a distance, practice death
    magic, dress well, and strike at the helpless.

    Followers are discouraged from all forms of healing and melee
    combat.

    Followers are forbidden from using healing spells.

    Followers gain +5/+10 per level.

GOD::BARB - H'ruth    
    The Horselord H'ruth is the patron deity of true warriors.  To
    those who measure civilization by cloth or scratches on parchment,
    H'ruth's followers are called barbarians.

    Followers are encouraged to kill and wade into the thick of
    battle, ideally whilst properly garbed.

    Followers are discouraged from attacking from afar.

    Followers are forbidden from using any spells.

    Followers gain +20/0 per level.

GOD::CLERIC - Pax
    The Principle of Pax guides every move of would-be clerics.
    Violence is the last resort of the incompetent.

    Followers are encouraged to heal, wear appropriate attire, and to destroy
    the undead.

    Followers are discouraged from initiating combat, feasting on the
    fallen when not hungry, and striking the helpless.

    Followers are forbidden from using death magic or harming those
    who are friendly.

    Followers gain +10/+10 per level.

GOD::CULTIST - ><0|V|
    Few are so foolish as to be a cultist of ><0|V|.

    Their fate is either to be envied or pitied.

ITEM::KNIFE - knife
    A stout knife suitable for carving meat or throwing.

ITEM::DAGGER - dagger
    A short blade well weighted for flight.

ITEM::SILVERDAGGER - silver dagger
    A short blade made of silver.  Pretty to look at, but likely annoying
    to keep clean.

ITEM::WARHAMMER - warhammer
    A finely crafted block of steel tops the stout handle.  This weapon
    can easily smash through the strongest of armour.

ITEM::SPEAR - spear
    An iron-tipped wooden spear.

ITEM::SILVERSPEAR - silver spear
    A silver-tipped wooden spear.

ITEM::CLUB - club    
    Nothing more than a short piece of wood.  Still, it can get the
    job done.

ITEM::SILVERSWORD - silver sword
    Some pompous prince thought it fit to make a long sword out of pure 
    silver.  Surely the prince knew it would dull easily and likely
    break in real combat?

ITEM::SHORTSWORD - short sword
    The smaller cousin of the eternally popular long sword.

ITEM::LONGSWORD - long sword
    The staple of any stylish fighter, the long sword makes an effective 
    weapon.  Critics denounce the trend for everyone to wield a long sword,
    citing that it leads to boring battle scenes and little originality
    in battle gear.  Said critics likely don't have to wander dangerous
    dungeons, however, so are best ignored.

ITEM::RAPIER - rapier
    Swashbuckling adventurers would feel naked without this sword at
    their side.  The rapier is a long, thin, blade designed for
    thrusting rather than cutting.  Its popularity among civilian
    duels has led some to hold the weapon in contempt, but in more
    practical combat it can hold its own against less stylish blades.

ITEM::FLAMESWORD - flaming sword
    This long sword has been coated with a substance that allows it
    to burn brightly.  If the steel does not slay them, the flame will.

ITEM::LIGHTNINGRAPIER - lightning rapier
    This rapier crackles with powerful electric currents.  The
    suppressed lightning makes the blade feel light and nimble - as if
    it were eager to ground against a foe.

ITEM::ICEMACE - ice mace
    The metal of this mace has been chilled to the point where the
    very air seems to condense on to its surface.  You need to be
    careful to hold only by the leather grip or fear suffering
    frostbite yourself.

ITEM::EARTHHAMMER - earth hammer
    Forged from living stone, this hammer seems to glow yellow in the dungeon
    light.  It feels very heavy in your hands, but when you try swinging it you
    find it moves swiftly and accurately.  The only odd behaviour is a slight
    pull towards the walls, as if the hammer were eager to reunite with the
    stone from which it was forged.

ITEM::MACE - mace
    What maces lack in subtlety, they make up for in brute power.  The mace
    is a club which is fashioned of iron rather than mere wood.  This
    gives it greater power in a more compact form factor.

ITEM::BOW - bow
    Fine yew wood has been placed under strain by the bowstring.  Wise
    warriors stick their foes with arrows before they can close.

ITEM::ARROW - arrow
    A wooden arrow with a stone head.  The arrow shaft is straight
    and true.  You have only your lack of skill to account for missing
    with this arrow.

ITEM::FIREARROW - fire arrow
    This arrow has been dipped in some form of thick naptha.  The burning
    liquid will splash on contact, setting any victim aflame.  This powerful
    secondary damage is why archers are willing to tolerate both the
    corresponding reduction in piercing damage and higher breaking rate of
    these arrows.

ITEM::HAT - floppy hat
    A felt cap dyed a gaudy blue. It would offer only the most meager of
    protection to your head.

ITEM::LEATHERCAP - leather cap
    Boiled leather shaped into a head piece provides some protection against
    having your brains spilled by an unfortunate blow.

ITEM::HELM - iron helm
    A sturdy iron helm provides excellent protection against hits to
    the head.  Unfortunately, the sound of rain on it would soon drive
    you mad.  It is good there is no rain in the dungeon.

ITEM::SANDALS - sandals
    Mere scraps of leather with leather thongs, sandals nonetheless
    keep your feet from being cut by the jagged rocks of less traveled
    passages.

ITEM::HIKINGBOOTS - hiking boots
    Sturdy leather boots which provide excellent ankle support.  These
    would help keep your balance when negotiating tough terrain.

ITEM::IRONSHOES - iron shoes
    Iron plates placed over the toes and along the sole ensure that
    your feet will be safe from most common mishaps.

ITEM::WINGEDBOOTS - winged boots
    These leather shoes have decorative wings made of pigeon feathers 
    attached to them.

ITEM::RIDINGBOOTS - riding boots
    These calf length leather boots would seem better suited to riding
    a horse than clomping about a dungeon.

ITEM::POINTEDSLIPPERS - pointed slippers
    These soft cloth slippers would be excellent for lounging about
    the fire while recounting the glory of your adventures.  Too bad
    you are currently *in* the adventure!

ITEM::WOODENSHIELD - wooden shield
    Constructed of several pieces of wood cleverly joined, the wooden
    shield is intended as disposable protection.

ITEM::BUCKLER - buckler
    A small iron shield designed to be strapped to the arm, the buckler
    has the notable advantage of not encumbering your off hand.

ITEM::ROUNDSHIELD - round shield
    A medium sized iron shield.

ITEM::KITESHIELD - kite shield
    The distinctively shaped kite shield provides effective defence
    against attack.

ITEM::TOWERSHIELD - tower shield
    The tower shield provides the best defence against attack.

ITEM::REFLECTSHIELD - mirror shield
    This silver shield has been shined to a high polish.  You can
    easily see your reflection in its surface.

ITEM::TORCH - torch
    A torch will brightly light the dungeon around you when equipped.

ITEM::BLUEPOTION - blue potion
    The bottle is filled with a viscous blue fluid.

ITEM::REDPOTION - red potion
    The red fluid in the bottle looks disconcertingly like blood.

ITEM::PURPLEPOTION - purple potion
    While the alliteration is tempting, you cannot bring your self to call this
    a "pleasing purple potion".  Maybe "peculiar purple potion"?

ITEM::YELLOWPOTION - yellow potion
    Everyone on the surface world knows that yellow potions are Heal potions.
    Everyone cannot be wrong!  Drink up!

ITEM::GREYPOTION - grey potion
    The grey coloured sludge in this potion bottle seems to stick to the sides
    of the bottle.  And seems to contain fibres.  Ugh!

ITEM::WHITEPOTION - white potion
    This bottle seems to contain some colloid whose sub-surface scattering
    reflects evenly all wavelengths of visible light.

ITEM::BLACKPOTION - black potion
    While the general colour of this potion must be called black, looking at
    the surface reveals an iridescent rainbow of colours.  It is really a
    rather pretty effect.

ITEM::CYANPOTION - cyan potion    
    Even though the bottle is tightly stoppered, you can smell something like
    the tang of metal.

ITEM::GLOWINGPOTION - glowing potion    
    "Never eat anything that glows of its own accord" - Wise Saying. 

ITEM::WATER - bottle of water
    The importance of potable water is not to be underestimated.  Not
    only does water have obvious practical use, but it is also able to
    to bless and curse items if it is itself so imbued.

ITEM::BOTTLE - empty bottle
    The logical consequence of emptying a bottle is this: an empty
    bottle.  You have heard in some realms the glass blowing guild is
    so powerful that adventurers are required by law to destroy their
    bottles immediately after consuming the contents.  You are glad
    you are in a realm that encourages recycling, even if that might
    mean cluttering your backpack.

ITEM::ROBE - plain robe
    Flowing cloth robes may hide your figure, but aren't very effective
    at blocking blows.  These robes have been dyed a gaudy blue.

ITEM::LEATHERTUNIC - leather tunic
    A boiled leather tunic deflects most edged weapons, and softens the
    blow of blunt weapons.

ITEM::STUDDEDLEATHER - studded leather tunic
    This boiled leather tunic has had numerous metal studs riveted to
    its surface for added protection.

ITEM::CHAINMAIL - chainmail
    Composed of many tiny loops of metal linked and riveted together,
    chainmail provides a flexible and effective form of protection.

ITEM::MITHRILMAIL - mithril chainmail
    This chain mail is composed not of mundane iron, but of the
    very rare metal known as mithril.

ITEM::BANDEDMAIL - banded mail
    Long strips of metal are riveted on top of a leather tunic to provide
    more consistent protection than that afforded by studded leather
    tunics.

ITEM::SPLINTMAIL - splint mail
    Long strips of metal are riveted on top of a leather tunic to provide
    more consistent protection than that afforded by studded leather
    tunics.
    
ITEM::PLATEMAIL - plate mail
    Composed of solid plates of iron, platemail provides an effective,
    if heavy, armour.

ITEM::CRYSTALPLATE - crystal platemail
    Fashioned in the manner of platemail, but with some form of hardened
    crystal rather than iron.  One would expect it to shatter at the
    first hit, but it seems more resilient than its nature would
    suggest.

ITEM::BOULDER - boulder
    An immense granite boulder that practically fills the dungeon corridors.
    Conveniently, its shape is spherical enough to permit a sufficiently strong
    shove to roll it a few feet.

ITEM::MOUNDFLESH - mound of flesh
    A disgusting ten-foot diameter mound of unspecified-flesh.  You can only
    hope it never belonged to a living creature.

ITEM::STATUE - statue
    It would look very pretty in your garden.  Too bad you are in a
    dungeon.

ITEM::CORPSE - corpse
    The main form of sustenance for adventurers deep in the dungeons.
    Many have asked why one would eat a steaming pile of raw flesh,
    but you will soon acquire a taste for it.  It can be quite delicious
    once you pick the gristle out.  Or so you keep telling yourself.

ITEM::BONES - bones
    Not as filling as corpses, but just as tasty.  Be careful you
    don't get bone slivers stuck in your teeth!

ITEM::ROCK - rock
    A small stone.  Unlike most small stones that you find in a dungeon, this
    one has the right heft and size to make an excellent missile weapon.

ITEM::MEATBALL - meatball
    Small spheroid of meat products.  One is cautioned not to investigate too
    closely what sort of meat went into its construction.

    You mouth waters briefly at the thought of Kobe-style meat balls mixed with
    havarti cheese in a bowl of rice.  Sadly, this meatball promises to be a
    tasteless morsel.

ITEM::PEARLNECKLACE - pearl necklace
    Numerous pearls have been threaded together to form a continuous chain.
    While there is no catch to open the chain, the necklace is large enough to
    fit over your head as is.

ITEM::GOLDNECKLACE - gold necklace
    A thick gold chain has one of the links engineered as a simple clasp.
    Styling!

ITEM::RUBYNECKLACE - ruby necklace
    A clear ruby is in a delicate gold setting.  The thin gold chain that
    supports the setting looks equally delicate, but feeling it you get the
    impression it could withstand a stronger pull than you'd suspect.

ITEM::IRONTORC - iron torc
    A close fitting neck-piece which is composed of heavy, inflexible, pieces.
    The clasp closes with a solid KCHUNK.  With all the creatures seeking your
    head, the idea of applying armour to your neck suddenly seems like a good
    idea.

ITEM::STUDDEDGORGET - studded gorget
    A boiled leather collar studded with metal spikes.  You are considering
    wearing it for its protective value.  Not to match your spurred boots.
    Right?

ITEM::FEATHERHELM - feathered helm
    An iron helm with a large feather stuck in it.

ITEM::SILVERCIRCLET - silver circlet
    A circlet composed of solid silver.

ITEM::BLACKHEART
    This is the black heart of Baezl'bub, carved from his still bleeding
    corpse.  This is what the entire quest was about - now that you
    have it, you merely must take it to the surface.

ITEM::YRUNE
    A stone the size of your hand.  On the stone's surface glows a blue
    Y.  Like any good adventurer, you recognize something so unique
    must have a purpose later in the dungeon, so resolve to carry it
    with you.

HELM::DRAIN
    Experiments with trying to produce the fabled Helm of Brilliance often
    result in creating a Helm of Draining.  Rather than amplifying the 
    wearers magic, they instead drain it, leaving the magician bereft of
    their usual magic regeneration.

    Sadly, most people do not use spells, so enamoured by the obviously
    magical nature of these helms, purchase them from deceptive merchants.
    This results in Helms of Draining accumulating in the dungeons wherever
    their last wearer died (or more hopefully, discarded it when they 
    learned the true nature).

HELM::TELEPATHY
    Treska of the Seven Alphabets is often credited with the invention
    of these handy helms.  It is rumoured her goal was to be able to read
    the thoughts of her servants and thus dispatch of any with carnal
    thoughts.  Thankfully for the rest of us, her attempt failed.  However,
    the helm does allow one to detect the general type of thought, letting
    one distinguish orc from troll through closed doors.

    The thoughts presented are weak, however, and often overwhelmed by visual
    sensory data.  This limitation can be overcome if the broadcaster is
    willing.  It is an interesting footnote that Treska never discovered
    this fact as apparently none of her servants were inclined to cooperate.

HELM::WARNING
    Helms of Warning work on an ingenious principle.  Unlike Helms of 
    Telepathy, which seek to detect the thoughts of others, and hence 
    are prone to sensory overload or failure to read mindless creatures,
    helms of warning instead read *your* innermost thoughts.  They reach
    into your innate inner self, the seat of your intuition.  Here they
    sense those tremulous fears which the presence of foes invokes, amplify
    them, and present them to your conscious mind.

HELP::POWDER
    Welcome to POWDER!

    Your goal is simple: dive to level 25 of the dungeon to reach Baezl'bub,
    slay him, and return to the surface with his black heart.  Plenty of
    nasty monsters stand in your way, however.  Fortunately, the dungeon
    is littered with useful equipment.

    Check for updates at www.zincland.com/powder.

HELP::POWDER_LOCKED
    Welcome to POWDER!

    Your goal is simple: dive to level 25 of the dungeon to reach Baezl'bub,
    slay him, and return to the surface with his black heart.  Plenty of
    nasty monsters stand in your way, however.  Fortunately, the dungeon
    is littered with useful equipment.

    Note: You must unlock to go deeper than level 15.

    Check for updates at www.zincland.com/powder.

HELP::KEYBOARD
    If you are using a computer to play POWDER, you will be using the keyboard
    entry method.

    Use the arrow keys to move around.  Bumping into things will perform
    the most likely action.  For example, bumping into a monster will
    attack it with your weapon.  Bumping into a door will attempt to
    open it.  You can also use hjkl or 4826 to move around.  If you press
    control you will toggle your safe-walk options and thus not attack
    creatures even if you step into them.  If you press shift, you
    will try to swap places with creatures.  If you press alt, you
    will try to jump in that direction.

    Cancel menus with Escape.  Select menu entries with Enter or Space.

    Hitting i will bring up your inventory screen.  You can hit enter
    or space on an item to get a context sensitive menu of what you
    can do with that item.  Sometimes you will have to specify a
    second target.  For example, if you Equip a sword, you need to
    specify you want to put it in your right hand.  You can also hit a
    quick key to directly choose a menu item.  

    Hitting O (note the capital!) will bring up the Options menu.  This
    is where saving, loading, selecting tilesets, etc, is done.

    Other key definitions are:
    o - Open
    c - Close
    e - Eat
    B - Breathe
    W - Move
    <, > - Climb
    ,, g - Pick up an item
    S - Swap
    q - Release
    R - Rest
    s - search
    ., w, 5 - Wait
    r - Run
    x - Look
    z - Cast a spell
    J - Jump
    m, X - Mini-map
    N - Name a creature
    C - Command a creature
    _ - Pray
    O - Options
    ? - Help
    F - Forget something
    f - Fire Quivered Item
    p - Previous message
    v - View Message History
    V - Command Menu
    & - Make a wish

    Inventory quick keys are:
    w - Wear or Wield
    T - Take off
    d - Drop
    e - Eat or Quaff
    r - Read
    ! - Dip
    z - Zap
    f - Mark as Favorite
    q - Put in Quiver
    t - Throw
    n - Name
    s - Sort Inventory
    S - Split Stack
    x - Examine

HELP::GAMEBOY
    If you are using a Gameboy Advance to play POWDER, you are using the
    button input method.

    Use the directional pad to move around.  Bumping into things will
    do the most appropriate action.  Bumping into a monster will attack it,
    bumping into a door will open it.

    Cancel menus with the B button.  Select menu entries with the A button.

    When wandering the world, the A, B, L, and R (and X and Y on the DS)
    buttons act according to their current mappings.  You can remap them by
    hitting Start, selecting the desired action, hitting Select to activate
    binding, and then hitting the button you want mapped there.   The status
    line will update to reflect the new mapping.  Note you can bind immediately
    to L and R without hitting the Select button.

    Start brings up the Command Menu. The Options... selection is special
    as it does not create a mapping, but rather brings up another menu.
    Here you can load and save and set the tilesets.  (And get to this help)
    A will immediately perform the selected action and B will cancel this menu.

    Select brings up your inventory.  By hitting A on an item, you will
    get a context sensitive menu which allows you to use the item.

HELP::STYLUS
    POWDER can be played entirely using only a stylus, or, equivalently, the
    left mouse button.  This method is available in the SDL and DS versions.

    When wandering the dungeon, click on the screen to move in that direction.
    If you click more than one tile away from yourself, you will do a "safe"
    move that won't open doors or attack creatures.  Clicking on an adjacent
    tile will attack the creature or open the door.

    You can search by clicking on yourself.

    The bottom of the screen has an Action Bar.  This is a series of buttons
    that do different actions.  An important one is the brown bag that brings
    up the inventory menu.  When the inventory is on screen, clicking on an
    item will give a one line description.  The action bar will update showing
    what are valid things to do with this item.  Clicking the inventory button
    again will close it.

    The command menu (>) button brings up a very long menu.  This is a list of
    every action that is possible.  You can scroll it by clicking outside to
    the top or bottom.  Clicking on an action name will perform that action.

    An important action on the verb list is the Options... action.  This brings
    up the configuration menu and has the Save & Quit option.

HELP::TOUCH
    While POWDER can be played solely with on screen controls, in practice
    one's fingers are not pointed enough to make the precision presses
    required.  To allow precision input in times of life or death, the
    direction pad and [A] and [B] buttons are present.

    Use the directional pad to move around.  Bumping into things will
    do the most appropriate action.  Bumping into a monster will attack it,
    bumping into a door will open it.

    Cancel menus with the B button.  Select menu entries with the A button.

    POWDER can also be played by directly touching the play area.

    When wandering the dungeon, press on the screen to move in that direction.
    If you touch more than one tile away from yourself, you will do a "safe"
    move that won't open doors or attack creatures.  Touching an adjacent
    tile will attack the creature or open the door.

    You can search by pressing on yourself.  It was with great reluctance
    I didn't use the same verb as before in that sentence.

    On the top and bottom of the screen are action buttons.  These buttons
    are all tied to different actions.  An important one is the brown bag that
    brings up the inventory menu.  When the inventory is on screen, touching 
    an item will give a one line description.  You can either press an
    action button to do something with the item, or press the [A] button
    to open a context menu.  Clicking the inventory button again will close it.

    The Command menu (>) button brings up a very long menu.  This is a list of
    every action that is possible.  You can scroll it by clicking outside to
    the top or bottom.  Clicking on an action name will perform that action.

    The Options menu (hammer and screw driver) button raises the configuration
    options.  Of especial note is the Buttons configuration - this allows
    you to change the layout of the buttons and add new buttons for
    different actions and to cast spells.

HELP::STATUSLINE
    The status line is across the bottom of the screen. It reads:

    A shield icon followed by a two digit number. This is your AC, or armour
    class. A higher number makes you harder to hit.

    A heart followed by a three digit number, slash, and two digit number. The
    three digit number is your current number of hit points. The two digit
    number is your physical level. You usually have ten times your physical
    level in max hitpoints. Hitpoints regenerate slowly over time.

    A wizard hat (Yes, that is what that is!) followed by a three digit number,
    a slash, and a two digit number. The three digit number is your current
    magic points. The two digit number is your magic level. You usually have a
    max magic of ten times the magic level. Magic points regenerate over time.

    An X followed by a three digit number. This lists your experience. As soon
    as it gets to one thousand, it resets, and you gain a level. On gaining a
    level, you choose which god you wish to worship for your next level. The
    choice of god determines what class you gain for that level. The number of
    experience you get per monster is a function of the difficulty of the
    monster and your character level (the sum of physical and magic levels)

    A ladder followed by a two digit number. This gives the current dungeon
    level you are on.

    A single space.

    Two character symbols. These give the current mappings of the [L] and [R]
    buttons. The first is [L] and second [R].  If this is the SDL version,
    instead of these mappings you will have the helpful word "Zinc".  If this
    is the DS version, the mappings for [Y] and [X] are presented here.

    A single space.

    Two character symbols. These give the current mappings of the [A] and [B]
    buttons. The first is [B] and second [A] (This may seem backwards, but [B]
    is to the left of [A], so it makes sense in practice) 
    
HELP::DEATH
    You have died.  
    
    You will get used to this.

    In other games, you may have saved & reloaded your character to
    get past tough battles.  This is not recommended in POWDER.  Most
    likely, you will get yourself in a situation where no saving and
    restoring can save you and end up frustrated.
    
    Instead, die often and try to learn from your deaths.  Whether it
    is to avoid attacking some otherwise peaceful dungeon inhabitants
    or exercising restraint in identifying items, there is a lesson in
    almost every death.

    The good news is that the random nature of the levels makes every
    game a new adventure.

SPELL::FLASH
    A blinding white light sears the optic nerve of any unfortunates
    targeted by this spell.  If the light doesn't kill them, their
    temporary blindness will likely nonetheless make them easy
    pickings.

SPELL::STICKYFLAMES
    The secret alchemy of Greek Fire is scoffed at by advanced
    wizards.  They instead point to the ease with which they achieve
    the same effect through sorcery.

SPELL::MAGICMISSILE
    The first attempt to project one's will at a distance is always the
    hardest.  The Magic Missile spell is most novices first experience
    with summoning kinetic energy, so is often scoffed at by higher
    level mages as a cantrip for newbies.  Wise wizards learn well the
    lessons that it teaches, and are always watching for a chance to
    use it.

SPELL::CHILL
    The cold of the abyss is channeled into the wizard's hands.  On
    touching a foe, this fearsome chill is transferred to it, freezing
    flesh and draining vitality.

SPELL::SPARK
    The wild, uncontrolled nature of galvanic magic is best shown
    with this spell.  No target is required, just cast and watch as
    your opponents are jolted.  Not recommended for those who have
    many friends.

SPELL::FROSTBOLT
    A chilling blast of supercooled air flies forward from the mage's
    hands.  As it flies forward, both water and CO2 sublimate into a
    ghostly frost which gives this spell its name.

SPELL::LIVINGFROST
    Once in a thousand years a confluence of hurricanes can result in an
    uber-storm.  The mammoth downdraft so generated can bring super-chilled air
    down from the stratosphere.  Unwitting ground creatures can find the
    ambient air temperature dropping a hundred degrees within seconds, flash
    freezing them into grisly popsicles.

    The Living Frost spell seeks to mimic these horrific effects with
    mundane magic.  Early experiments with flash freezing found a freaky
    phenomenon.  At sufficiently low temperatures, the air seemed to acquire a
    malignant intelligence of its own!

    It was the renowned summoner Kratsbury who first added a simple compulsion
    cantrip to the frozen air spell, thus creating the first documented
    wizard-controlled Living Frost.

SPELL::BLIZZARD
    The power barely contained in a Living Frost can be unraveled.  The
    resulting explosion of ice and sleet affects all in a large radius,
    so the caster is cautioned to ensure he has retreated to a safe
    distance first.

SPELL::FIREBALL
    The mainstay of any mage worth his salt.  What would a mage be if
    he cannot fling balls of fire?  One is forewarned not to get too
    carried away, or the person crisped might be oneself.
    
SPELL::FLAMESTRIKE
    The most holy and devout can request a special favour from their
    deity.  A giant pillar of flame engulfs any chosen foe within
    sight of the mage-priest.  Study the effect well, for if you were
    to displease your deity, you may be at the receiving end.

SPELL::LIGHTNINGBOLT
    The actinic glare of a lightning bolt searing through a darkened
    corridor would be enough to strike terror in the most stout of
    warrior.  One can only imagine their fear when the bolt, which
    seemed to just miss them, bounces off a wall to strike them
    straight on!

SPELL::CHAINLIGHTNING
    The wild-mage R'tar was said to be particularly fond of this
    destructive spell.  While he had found a secret method to avoid
    being hit by the resulting chain reaction, his friends had not.
    The natural consequence is that R'tar is now friendless.

SPELL::SUNFIRE
    Some magic is just too potent for mere mortals.  None should have
    learned the words for this spell.  If any had learned it, none
    should have written them down.  The High Kingdom of Qwar places
    the penalty for speaking of the spell at death by fire.

    Needless to say, it is quite readily available in any well stocked
    library.

SPELL::ACIDSPLASH
    A thick spray of highly corrosive acid is shot forth.  The massive
    damage inflicted by this spell attracts many mages.  They soon
    learn that the risk of backsplash hitting them tempers the
    usefulness of this otherwise potent spell.

SPELL::ACIDICMIST
    A knowledgeable mage can combine the water droplets in the air with
    the naturally occurring nitrogen.  By condensing the resulting nitric
    acid into large enough particles, it forms a dense acidic mist
    that wreaks havoc on those who breathe the noxious fumes.

SPELL::CORROSIVEEXPLOSION
    The Plane of Acid is not uninhabited.  The skilled mage can bring
    forth one of the denizens of this plane.  The semi-living blob of
    acid will instantly consume any items it touches.  However, it
    doesn't last long - within moments it destabilizes and
    explodes.  The strength and size of the explosion depends
    on the number of items it fed on, so this spell is best cast on
    a stack of unwanted equipment.  And best cast if you already have
    acid resistance.

SPELL::ACIDPOOL
    A fountain of acid is summoned from the Plane of Acid and directed
    at a specific point.  So corrosive is this acid that it almost
    always dissolves the location entirely; leaving in its wake a
    fuming pool of acid.

SPELL::MINDACID
    A powerful psychoactive acid is synthesized from the outer layers
    of the skin of your hands.  By touching a foe with this acid, you
    can disrupt their mental processes with confusing effects.  Be
    careful you apply the acid quickly, because in time it will be
    absorbed into your own skin, making you the victim!

SPELL::DISINTEGRATE
    The effects of disintegration care not for your strength.  All victims
    are treated equally before the powerful magic of this spell.  The very
    atoms of the victim's being are ripped apart, leaving behind ghastly
    wounds.  The larger the victim, the larger the wounds.

SPELL::REGENERATE
    Some warriors scoff at this spell.  They claim it is better to
    have the instant-gratification of a heal spell.  Wise fighters,
    however, know that it is often easier to cast a spell before a
    battle than during it!  Further, this spell has been specially
    formulated to require minimal magic to cast.  It instead draws
    power from magic the mage *would* have regenerated.  Being able to
    borrow magic points from the future can make the difference of
    life or death.

SPELL::SLOWPOISON
    Vile serpents and bloated spiders lurk under every rock.  It is
    only a matter of time before one receives a sting which poisons
    one's flesh.  While no substitute for a cure, this spell can
    provide temporary immunity for the ongoing damage to tissue and
    organ.  Some warriors swear by casting this spell prior to
    becoming poisoned - they then need not worry about curing during
    combat.

SPELL::HEAL
    The mainstay of any would-be cleric, this simple spell closes
    wounds and restores vitality.

SPELL::CUREPOISON
    There is a reason why some poisons are called "Deadly".  Those
    poisons are the reason why it is foolish to not have some way to
    cure.  This simple spell instantly flushes all toxins from the
    body, preventing any further damage.

SPELL::MAJORHEAL
    Designed for more serious wounds than Heal, the Major Heal spell
    also boasts greater mana to health efficiency.  It does have a
    higher base mana cost, so clerics are recommended to keep Heal
    well practiced.

SPELL::RESURRECT
    The ultimate power for any cleric is not that of death, but that
    of life.  This complicated ritual can, at great cost to the
    cleric, revive any fallen creature.  The creature so restored from
    death will be loyal to the cleric.  Be warned that one so raised
    is very weak, and should be healed forthwith.

SPELL::LIGHT
    Let dark and dank dungeons be well-lit and dank dungeons!  The
    light spell makes dangerous corridors into mundane hallways.

SPELL::DARKNESS
    There are certain people who prefer their deeds not be witnessed.
    For them, it can be convenient to ensure the light of day does not
    shine where they choose.

SPELL::KNOCK
    A sticky door giving you problems?  A locked chest won't budge?
    The simple Knock spell can effortless open any object capable of
    being opened.  A second application will then equally swiftly return the
    object to a closed state.  Open.  Close.  Open.  Close.  You could do this
    all day.  Indeed, a common punishment for misbehaving apprentices is to
    open and close a door two hundred times.

SPELL::TRACK
    The track spell builds up a standing magic field around the target.
    This standing wave is attached and powered by the life-essence of
    the target, so moves with the target wherever they go.  Creatures so
    marked can be sensed by anyone, not just the original caster.

    Treska of the Seven Alphabets is said to have demanded that her
    students submit to a Track spell.  Only then could she be satisfied
    that her students were not going to less reputable parts of town.
    Fortunately for Treska's students, the standing field does dissipate
    over time if not renewed.

SPELL::WIZARDSEYE
    What better way to scout the passage ahead than a floating eyeball
    that can move easily though stone?  The Wizard's Eye is a
    phase-shifted version of the common floating eye summoned to do
    the mage's spying.  It is important to remember that while one is
    peeping in the form of the wizard's eye, one's body is lying
    helpless where you left it.

SPELL::POSSESS
    Casters of this spell have no need to impose their will through
    clever dialogue or the brandishing of weapons.  Instead, they
    confront their foe on the mental plane.  If successful, they
    subsume their target's will to their own, granting them control of
    every action.  Note that one's own body is left defenceless during
    the possession so it is wise to plan ahead.  If your possessed
    creature dies you will return to your own body - but be warned the
    shock exacts a price, so you might consider Releasing your spirit
    before the final blow is dealt.

SPELL::DIAGNOSE
    The first step in any treatment should be to discover what the ailment is.
    This powerful piece of divinition magic seeks to remove the guess work from
    triage.  A quick cast will let you know not just the relative health of the
    creature, but what its absolute health is.

SPELL::PRESERVE
    The dungeon is filled with worms, insects, and bacteria.  All of these 
    are eager to consume any fresh carrion that falls to the floor.  
    First time dungeon explorers are often shocked at how quickly a 
    dead foe is stripped to the bones, and then the bones themselves are
    carried off.  

    Before he became an Arch-Lich, Tlosh was often aggravated by how 
    quickly his research subjects decomposed.  His research resulted
    in a localised stasis field that can arrest the decay process.  Preserve
    has become a staple among necromancers for whom the fallen is
    a fuel.
    
SPELL::MAGICMAP
    Dungeons can be twisty, turny places.  Often one *knows* there is
    something nearby, but cannot figure out how to get there.  This
    spell provides a magic vision of the surroundings to the mage.
    This vision is an accurate portrayal of the local area, including
    areas completely inaccessible to normal travel.

SPELL::DETECTCURSE
    It is a foolish and short lived adventurer that tries on whatever is found
    in the dungeon.  While this can serve to identify items, some items are
    cursed so will not be so easy to take off.  In the case of certain amulets
    that may spell certain doom.

    For those not willing to go to the effort or expense to fully identify
    every item, it is often sufficient to just separate the cursed from the
    blessed.  This simple spell attunes the caster to their possessions;
    allowing them to detect the status of each of their items.

SPELL::IDENTIFY
    Items found on a dungeon floor may contain great power.  The
    trouble with great power is that it can be for both good and evil.
    Often, even things which are made with the best of intentions, can
    cause great harm when an ignorant Barbarian starts to toy with it.
    This spell lets you determine the functionality and nature of one
    item.

SPELL::BLINK
    A quick get away is 9/10ths of the law.  Blink lets you do a
    controlled teleport anywhere in sight for a small cost.  A few
    quick Blinks can confuse the chasers and get one to safety.

SPELL::FETCH
    Nowhere is the laziness of wizards better exemplified than in this spell.
    Not content with being able to move mountains or burn forests with an
    incantation, the modern mage must also be able to summon his minions or
    retrieve his fallen pen without stirring from his desk.

SPELL::TELEPORT
    With the proper incantation and skilled direction of magical energies, 
    one can increase the similarity of two different locations.  When the
    two locations become the same up to 2^-20 cm, the universe itself no
    longer can tell them apart.  The net effect is that, while to outsiders
    the wizard has seemingly teleported from one location to the other,
    what has actually happened is that the source location became the
    destination location!

    One must be forewarned that if an area has sufficiently high magical flux,
    it cannot be stabilized sufficiently to achieve such levels of
    similarity!  Also, some items, due to their essentially unique nature,
    prevent the space around them from being similarized.

SPELL::TELEWITHCONTROL
    To choose your location for teleportation requires not only greater
    focus, but greater power as well.  While the normal teleport spell
    finds a location whose gradients make it easy to achieve similarity,
    the teleport with control spell seeks to bend the gradients at
    *any* location.

    There are still limitations, however.  One cannot teleport into
    something one can't move in normally.

SPELL::DIRECTWIND
    The power of the air is yours!  You can command a stiff breeze to blow
    in the direction of your choosing!

    Most mages discount this spell as entirely useless.  They only learn
    it when it is forced upon them to achieve more powerful effects.
    Wise mages, however, treasure this innocuous seeming spell.

SPELL::FORCEBOLT
    A bolt of pure force is created and slammed forward with devastating 
    effect.  While the range is very short, it is more than made up for
    with the power.  Many objects are instantly shattered by the
    strength of this spell.

SPELL::SUMMON_FAMILIAR
    More than just a faithful companion, a familiar can be thought of as an
    extension of oneself.  Much like one's own heart, if well tended the
    familiar will grow and be a valuable ally.  Neglected, more than just the
    familiar will suffer.

SPELL::TRANSFER_KNOWLEDGE
    It is often said that there are no shortcuts to the hard-won lessons of
    real world experience.  This sort of thing is said by those who lack access
    to this powerful spell.

    Converting the mage's raw experience into a form of intermediary magical
    particles, this spell then applies those particles to the designated
    target.  As the particles decay they release the experience in the
    recipient.

SPELL::FORCEWALL
    A wall of pure force is created and projected outwards from the caster
    with devastating force.  Creatures struck by the wall are knocked
    backwards, only to be hit again as the wall continues its inexorable
    motion.  The final radius of the wall is dependent on the perimeter,
    so wise mages note that this spell has greater range in a corridor
    than in an open room.

SPELL::DIG
    The spell of Dig carefully controls its energies in the Plane of
    Earth.  It focuses on the removal of dirt and stone from ones
    path, allowing one to fashion dungeon complexes of one's own
    design.  Care must be taken that the rock fragments blasted
    free do not cause harm!

SPELL::SANDSTORM
    Refinements of the dig spell to have it operate at a distance from 
    the caster encountered difficulties.  The additional energy to
    project afar would be released at the point of impact, causing a
    large expolsion engulfing the caster.  Research stalled until a
    clever solution was found - generate at the same time a powerful
    cyclone to keep the supersonic fragments trapped in a small area
    until their velocity is dissipated by friction.  Of course, this
    means it is all the more important to keep workers back from the
    digging site!

    Note that care must be taken in computing the safety margin to
    factor in the current wind direction.

SPELL::CREATEPIT
    The excavating powers of the Dig spell need not be directed at walls.
    One may instead direct them at the floor.  Ideally, the floor beneath
    your enemies.  Even if they are not killed when they fall into the
    resulting pit, the time it takes them to climb out of the pit is
    time not spent attacking you!

SPELL::GROWFOREST
    When the Druids of Estan discovered that Tlosh had been funding their
    research into this spell, they should have stopped their inquiries at once.
    Instead they convinced themselves that this showed a change in Tlosh's
    heart - after all, what possible ill purpose could a spell to create a
    forest have?

    The Druids of Estan have regretted their choice ever since.

SPELL::ANIMATEFOREST
    When the Druids of Estan were sent into hiding by Tlosh's undead army of
    archers, they faced the difficult prospect of transplanting their sacred
    groves.  Unearthing a tree and replanting it is a delicate task which can
    often shock the tree in ways it will never recover.  It was the Druid Bazz
    who made the breakthrough that solved this issue: why not have the trees
    transplant themselves?  By accelerating the tree's metabolism and imbuing it
    with a simple goal seeking mentality, the tree is able to lift itself out
    of its soil, walk on its roots to its new location, and safely replant
    itself there.

    It is a sad commentary on the rest of "civilization" that this spell is
    best known, not for its horticulture purposes, but merely as an efficient
    way to acquire giant fighting trees for warfare.

SPELL::DOWNPOUR
    Originally formulated to deal with the crippling droughts that faced the
    Western Pederbar region, downpour was never successfully used in that
    capacity.  The intensity of the deluge ensures any parched soil targeted
    will be washed away, defeating its use as a direct rain replacement.
    Attempts to use it to replenish resevoirs for irrigations systems were
    abandoned when it was realized that, unlike the version used by Water
    Elementals, this spell actually acquires its water from the surrounding air
    instead of the Plane of Water.  As such, it will only worsen drought
    conditions.

    Downpour is now only learned by wizards who appreciate the ability to use
    the threat of a good soaking to keep unruly apprentices in line.

SPELL::ROLLINGBOULDER
    Rather than disintegrate all of the rock in a section of wall, one 
    may instead crudely shape it into a large spherical boulder.  Add
    to this a large jolt of pure force, and you can have the boulder
    rolling towards your enemies.

    Unfortunately, this spell was designed by none other than Prakal the Earth
    mage, who is at least as renowned for his short-sightedness as his
    skill at deriving new earth-related spells.  Do not be too surprised when
    the resulting boulders all start rolling in your direction.

SPELL::PETRIFY
    The dread power of the Cockatrice can be yours.  Zapping a foe with this
    spell starts a process of petrification, wherein their flesh is
    replaced by solid stone!  Cruel mages take advantage of the high
    black market value for such art.

SPELL::STONETOFLESH
    The grisly reversal of the Petrify Spell is not for the faint of heart.
    While it is essential for restoring those who have become statues,
    the process is not something one should watch closely.  Equally
    disturbing is the effect of applying it to stone which was never
    living.
    
SPELL::ENTOMB
    It is said that Prakal, the Earth Mage, perfected a version of this
    spell which does not require Dig as a prerequisite.  We can only
    guess what it was.  Prakal's mummified remains, found buried in solid rock,
    have told us nothing.

SPELL::RAISE_UNDEAD
    If bringing the dead to life is the ultimate goal of the cleric,
    the ultimate goal of a necromancer is to bring the dead to
    undeath.  Raise Undead allows a necromancer to infuse the fallen
    bodies of foes with a sick parody of life.  Fresh corpses yield
    shambling zombies, whilst a necromancer willing to wait for bones
    will gain fleeter moving skeletons.

SPELL::RECLAIM_SOUL
    While Tlosh disapproves of all forms of healing, necromancers have found in
    practice it is important that they keep their still-mortal frame intact.
    The soul reclamation spell fulfills this in a Tlosh friendly way by using
    the life energy of another to power the recuperation, thereby avoiding any
    contact with the positive energies that traditional healing spells tap
    into.  This spell, when targeted at an undead under one's control,
    recovers the negative energy used to power the undead and repurposes it to
    close one's own wounds.

SPELL::DARK_RITUAL
    One's minions can be consumed for more than just a quick heal.
    The negative energy of undead under your control can be
    transformed into a powerful attack to destroy your foes.  On the
    completion of this dark ritual any adjacent undead will be so
    converted.  
    
    It is rumoured that this spell is the first step in transforming
    into a lich.

SPELL::GHASTIFY
    This ghastly spell does not wait for the foe to die.  Any creature
    at death's gate can be the target of this cruel magic.  The
    remaining life force is used to power a grisly transformation from
    life into unlife.  The resulting ghast makes an excellent addition
    to any necromancers undead army.

SPELL::BINDSOUL
    With greater control over the powers of death, necromancers can
    extract the souls from dead corpses and use them as fuel.  This
    can be used to transform innocent creatures into sinister pets.
    It is also believed the soul can be consumed with this spell and
    used to construct animated golems.  While most golems made in
    this way soon vanish, it is rumoured that more complicated rituals
    can make stone golems that are permanent.
    
SPELL::SOULSUCK
    No matter how healthy the opponent, they have no defence against
    this vile magic.  Their inner essence is ripped out and bound to
    yourself.  You acquire their skills and spells while they are left
    in an amnesic daze.  The one downside is that the binding isn't
    permanent.

SPELL::POISONITEM
    Reaching into the Plane of Decay, this spell brings forth vile
    fluids and binds them into a viscous mass.  This is then applied
    to your wielded weapon, ready for you to apply to the foe of your
    choice.

SPELL::POISONBOLT
    A physical bolt of solidified poison is shaped and then sent forth
    with great speed.  Those struck take both the physical damage of
    the bolt and suffer the harsh poison that it is composed of.

SPELL::SUMMON_IMP
    Why anyone would want more of these troublemakers is a question
    often asked when this spell is taught.  However, one advantage of
    this spell is that the imp is only summoned temporarily.  This
    means the necromancer need not worry about conserving the imps
    life.  Many necromancers thus swear by this spell as their
    replacement for Fireball.

SPELL::SUMMON_DEMON
    Nine out of ten necromancers agree that daemons make much more
    suitable companions than their smaller imps.  The tenth
    necromancer, however, was Tlosh.  They are still finding pieces of
    the other nine necromancers in the astral plane.

    Summoned for much longer than imps, daemons have correspondingly
    greater strength.  As a bonus, even if you like imps, you can let
    the daemon deal with summoning such underlings for you.

SPELL::CLOUDKILL
    A truly ferocious spell.  You begin by spitting at a chosen foe.
    As the spittle flies from your mouth, it transforms into a
    venomous ball of green poison.  If it successfully strikes your
    foe, it will explode into a cloud of choking poisonous fumes.
    These will linger long after your foe has succumbed, killing
    mercilessly any who stray within.  Even if you have the misfortune
    of missing your foe, fear not, for the venomous ball will explode
    wherever it terminates.

SPELL::FINGEROFDEATH
    When one considers the years of study required to learn this most
    potent spell, one would think the users would be wise.
    The rules of reflection governing spell bounces should be well known by
    anyone who has cast the pre-requisite, Magic Missile.
    Nonetheless, careless Finger of Death accidents claim dozens of
    necromancers every year!  Do not become another statistic!

SKILL::DODGE
    Careful study has allowed you to predict most foes' moves.  Long
    hours of practice has trained your reflexes.  You can now
    occasionally evade enemy attacks, regardless of how skilled the
    enemy might be.

SKILL::MOVINGTARGET
    Let the barbarians charge in straight lines.  You know the folly of
    such bravado.  While you waste no time in closing with the enemy,
    you wisely seek cover and sudden changes in your direction.  By
    presenting a moving target to foes, you have a high chance of avoiding
    ranged attacks so long as you are moving.

SKILL::SEARCH
    Diligent observation combined with experience has led you to be
    able to readily identify secret doors and hidden traps.  A quick
    glance around will reveal to you what others must spend many turns
    looking for.

SKILL::EVADETRAP
    Fast reflexes and nimble feet allow you to leap safely to the pits
    edge before falling into the spikes below.  The only way for you
    to fall down a hole is to climb into it willingly.

SKILL::ENDUREHUNGER
    Years on the open plain have taught your body how to conserve its energy
    in times of short ration.  Not only are you able to continue functioning
    while hungry long after others have collapsed, but your extensive
    knowledge of plants, animals, and fungi, ensure you can see a rich 
    banquet where others see only an empty field.

SKILL::BUTCHERY
    While city-dwellers may believe that Barbarians eat their prey like wild
    animals, Barbarians know that there is a lot to be gained by a more careful
    separation of meat from sinew.  Wise Barbarians learn butchery skills so
    they can make the most of their meals.  Knowledge of the key organs allow
    them to extract the most out of any corpse they decide to eat.

    Careful dressing of the kill does more than provide more
    sustenance.  The separation of various organs and humours allows
    one to avoid poisonous portions, either native to the creature or
    inflicted prior to death.  Further, any special virtues of the
    corpse can be acquired without relying on chance ingestion of the
    proper portions.

SKILL::CLEANKILL
    Barbarians hunting on the steppes have learned that it does not suffice to
    defeat one's prey.  One must defeat them in a manner that leaves their
    corpse still salvageable, or one faces hunger as surely as if one did not
    hunt at all.  The Clean Kill Skill represents the study of these
    techniques.  Once mastered, creatures slain in melee combat will be much
    more likely to leave behind a tasty corpse.
    
SKILL::LEAPATTACK
    It takes more than courage to leap into the middle of a heated
    melee,  What it takes is a certain suicidal disregard for self
    preservation.

    Would be leaping barbarians are cautioned that while the lessons
    taught with this skill let one attack when landing from a leap, it
    is of little help if one cannot make the heroic leap in the first
    place.

SKILL::CHARGE
    Weapon set, blood-curdling scream on lips, the valiant warrior
    charges into the battle!  The momentum, both physical and
    emotional, generated by a swift charge can be translated into
    crushing damage.

SKILL::ARMOUR_HELMET
    You realize well that your head is the most valuable location.
    You know how to properly adjust the myriad straps and belts which
    are used to secure a helmet in place.  Because you correctly put
    on, and properly adjust for the size of, your helms, you derive
    additional protection from them.

SKILL::ARMOUR_SHIELD
    It might be fine for a Barbarian to strap a shield to an arm and
    consider training complete.  You know, however, that correctly
    parrying attacks is an art onto itself.  You derive additional
    protection from shields.

SKILL::ARMOUR_BODY
    Most of one's vitals lie within the torso, so it is wise indeed to
    know how to properly protect them.  Many a fool has felt secure in
    plate only to receive a dirk to the kidneys which ended his day.
    You derive additional protection from body armour.

SKILL::ARMOUR_BOOTS
    Dungeon floors are uneven at best, and littered with sharp-pointy
    things at worst.  A good pair of boots is a must, but so is
    proper usage of the boots.  One's laces must be tight, one's
    shoes must be adjusted to fit one's own feet, the requirements go
    on.  From this skill, you derive additional protection from boots.

SKILL::ARMOUR_CLOTH
    You understand the care and maintenance of cloth based armours.  
    This allows you to properly wear them and use them for maximum
    defence.

SKILL::ARMOUR_LEATHER
    You are familiar with medium weight armours, such as those made
    from leather or wood.  You can properly care for the items and
    thus use them to full effect.

SKILL::ARMOUR_IRON
    This is the Iron Age, after all.  While you may not be able to smelt
    raw ore and fashion a suit of mail from scratch, you do know enough
    to fix the dings and scratches of a suit of iron mail.  By properly
    repairing these items, you gain better protection value from them.

SKILL::ARMOUR_EXOTIC
    Suits of plate mail made of gold.  Helmets formed of the skull case
    of giant beetles.  The deeps have many odd and wonderful types of 
    armour.  You have devoted yourself to researching the myriad methods
    of building armour from sundry scraps, and now reap the benefits
    with your ability to properly use even the oddest of defensive
    accruements.

SKILL::WEAPON_SMALL
    Small, light weight, weapons have their own code of usage.  One
    cannot rely on the weight of the weapon to do your work, but
    instead must practice finesse and precision.  This skill improves
    your ability with all weapons sized Small and lower.

SKILL::WEAPON_MEDIUM
    Medium weapons are the mainstay of most armouries.  They require a
    balance of finesse and brute force to wield.  This skill improves
    your ability with all weapons sized Medium.

SKILL::WEAPON_LARGE
    Large weapons are favoured by Barbarian hordes.  Their massive
    size means crushing damages, and also means great strength is
    required to wield them.  Subtlety is definitely not a requirement.
    This skill improves your ability with all weapons sized Large and
    higher.

SKILL::WEAPON_RANGED
    Ranged weapons require you to judge distances and properly aim.
    This skill improves your ability with all weapons that are thrown.

SKILL::WEAPON_EDGED
    Edged weapons, such as swords, rely on slashing attacks to perform
    their damage.  As such, one must adjust one's style to gain the
    best effect.  This skill improves your ability with all edged
    weapons.

SKILL::WEAPON_BLUNT
    Blunt weapons cause damage by brute force.  One's targeted area
    tends to be bigger, so different vitals may be chosen.  This skill
    improves your ability with all blunt weapons.

SKILL::WEAPON_POINTED
    Pointed weapons, such as spears, are designed to be stabbed at
    one's foes.  This can allow force to be applied to a
    small area, which, provided the area is chosen correctly, can have
    devastating results.  This skill improves your ability with all
    pointed weapons.

SKILL::WEAPON_IMPROVISE
    To the knowledgeable assassin, anything is a weapon.  This skill
    improves your ability to wield non-weapon objects as a weapon.

SKILL::TWOWEAPON
    Many naive warriors learn this skill thinking double the weapons 
    means double the damage.  They then learn that it is important to
    become skilled with both weapons that they wish to wield.  Even then,
    one may only get an extra attack with the offhand for every two
    attacks with the primary hand.

    Those harbouring fantasies of entering battle with twin longswords should
    be cautioned that when the weapon in the off hand is not smaller than the
    one in the main hand it is even harder to wield.

SKILL::AMBIDEXTROUS
    Instead of concentrating on your strengths, you focused on your weaknesses.
    Your so-called "off hand" is no longer distinguishable from your primary
    hand.  You can use either hand equally effectively.  This means it is no
    longer important that the second weapon be lighter than the first.

SKILL::WEAPON_KNOCKOUT
    The more light weight blunt weapons should not be discounted.
    The increased control they afford allows a precision blow to knock
    an enemy unconscious.  This gives the chance to escape, or for the
    less sporting, the chance for some free hits.

SKILL::WEAPON_STUN
    While blunt weapons may not produce severed arteries, the
    concussive force of a well placed blow can leave an opponent
    dazed.  A stunned foe will flail randomly, as likely to hurt an
    ally as an enemy.

SKILL::WEAPON_KNOCKBACK
    Using the momentum of large weapons to the best advantage, you can
    send enemies flying backwards with a single hit.  The time they
    spend regaining their ground is time you can spend readying the
    next devastating blow.

SKILL::WEAPON_BLEEDINGWOUND
    The skilled rogue knows the weak points of any enemy.  A quick
    dagger thrust in the right artery can inflict a heavily bleeding wound.
    The resulting bloodloss can bring down all but the strongest of foes.

SKILL::WEAPON_DISARM
    Fencing masters can lift their opponent's weapons out of their grasp and
    send them clattering to the floor.  Where no weapon is present, they can
    opt instead to trip up their opponent, leaving them unable to attack
    successfully until they regain their footing.

SKILL::WEAPON_IMPALE
    Many tales speak of strong warriors who can drive a spear right through an
    opponent.  Fewer tales tell of the barbarians who can continue the
    stroke with enough strength and precision to strike the next rank of foes.

    Tales of the Horselord H'ruth, before he ascended to godhood, say that
    he was known to skewer a half dozen hill orcs with a single thrust of
    his silver spear Relattrey.

SKILL::WEAPON_RICOCHET
    Flying arrows do not need to stop when they first hit a wall.  The
    skilled (and, if possessing allies nearby, foolhardy) archer can
    bounce the arrows off the walls to strike those not in a clear line
    of fire.

SKILL::WEAPON_TRUEAIM
    With sufficient practice throwing knives the skilled rogue
    achieves uncanny abilities.  It is said that they cannot miss a
    target that they choose.

SKILL::WEAPON_RIPOSTE
    When an adversary strikes is the best time to counterstrike.
    Light weapons allow the practiced fighter to use the opportunity
    of an attack to gain the chance of a counter attack.

SKILL::WEAPON_PARRY
    The skilled fighter does not rely on his armour alone to absorb 
    the blows of an enemy.  Instead, by meeting blade with blade, one
    can stop many attacks from falling true.

MOB::AVATAR - you
    Adventurers may start off soft and tasty, but dungeon denizens are
    warned that they can quickly become obscenely powerful.  Single
    adventurers have been known to slaughter every living creature in
    a dungeon for no more reason than "because they were there".

MOB::GREENDRAGON - green dragon
    The scales of this ferocious beast are coated with a thin veneer
    of greenish slime.  This gives more than just the name to the
    beast - it is also the source of the green dragons feared poison.

MOB::WHITEDRAGON - white dragon
    Unlike most cold blooded creatures, which merely maintain the
    ambient temperature, white dragons are truly cold blooded.  A
    refrigerant process chills their blood to well below the freezing 
    point of most liquids.

MOB::REDDRAGON - red dragon
    Red dragons are the best known example of the myriad draconian
    species.  As such, their fireball breath need not be mentioned,
    no?

MOB::BLUEDRAGON - blue dragon
    A nimbus of electrical arcs surrounds this fearsome beast.  The
    crackling of these bursts of electricity can be heard for quite
    some distance.  Be careful lest they discharge through you!

MOB::YELLOWDRAGON - yellow dragon
    Yellow dragons normally live on desolate wastelands.  There they
    hollow out complicated lairs through the use of powerful acids
    created in their gizzard.  Adventurers have reported that when
    threatened, this acid can be spit to devastating effect!

MOB::COCKATRICE - cockatrice
    The odd appearance of the cockatrice - half rooster, half lizard -
    would be a source of jokes, if it were not for its devastating
    ability.  So deadly is this attack that most adventurers suggest
    avoiding cockatrices at all costs.

    The renowned half-thief Parkdat claims to have survived an
    encounter with a cockatrice by clever application of items she had
    on hand.  While she has not revealed what technique she used,
    spies report she has been making inquiries about rings of acid
    resistance.

MOB::DAEMON - daemon
    Hailing from the pits of hell, this minor daemon has been brought
    to the surface to give the living a taste of what they have in
    store.

MOB::ICEDAEMON - ice daemon
    Those who are waiting for hell to freeze may be shocked to learn
    large portions of it are already frozen.  From these bitter
    ice expanses come the dreaded ice daemons.

MOB::BAEZLBUB - Baezl'bub
    Known also as "He whose name cannot be spelt correctly", Baezl'bub
    has left his stygian abyss to lay some smack down on the surface
    world.  You guessed it: You are the only hope to stop his
    nefarious scheme.  The task is simple: Kill him, take his heart,
    take it to the surface.  The devil, as they say, is in the
    details.  This is one *big* detail.

MOB::CRETAN_MINOTAUR - Cretan Minotaur
    The Minotaur, a fearsome monster half human and half bull, resides
    at the center of a twisted maze.  Daedelus was clever to ensure
    the passages of the maze were too narrow for the minotaur to
    escape.  Hopefully you are equally clever and stick to small
    passages.

MOB::TRIDUDE - tridude
    Exhibiting rare trilateral symmetry, some speculate that the
    green skinned tridudes are not native to our plane.  This doesn't
    stop the tridudes from killing unwary adventurers, however, so
    save the philosophy until you have escaped the dungeon.

MOB::REDTRIDUDE - red tridude
    If you learned anything from dragons, it is that a creature in a
    new colour skin likely has some new abilities.  

MOB::BLUETRIDUDE - blue tridude
    This blue-hued representative of the three-legged tridude kind
    zaps and crackles with latent electricity.

MOB::PURPLETRIDUDE - purple tridude
    If Wpark the Wonderful had encountered the purple tridude he
    likely would have dropped his studies on kobolds entirely.  Not
    only are they a more pleasing shade of lavender, but the glint of
    the three eyes shows considerable intelligence.

    Do not let the three stubby legs fool you - the purple tridude is
    an avid tool user who has also mastered control of the forces that
    hold the universe together.

MOB::GOLDTRIDUDE - Golden Tridude
    A massive representative of tridude-kind towers above you.  Its
    skin is a blinding gold that presents a shimmering mirror of the
    surrounding dungeon.  You fervently hope that this is as big as
    tridudes come.

MOB::FIREBEETLE - fire beetle
    The fire beetle gains its name from the self-igniting fluid it can
    spray on those that threaten it.  Those who do not want to get
    burned should let these beetles be.

MOB::GOLDBEETLE - gold beetle
    When the Deeper Depths Mining Company contracted Prakal the Earth
    Mage to increase the profitability of their gold mines, they had
    envisioned some new variant of the Dig spell that would extract
    gold from baser metals.  What they did not expect was for Prakal
    to instead design a living creature!

    The Gold Beetle is wondrously designed.  Living on a diet of gold,
    it is little surprise that it has a 24 carat body.  Prakal's
    intention was that Deeper Depths could release a population of
    beetles in their mines, wait, and then harvest the fully grown
    beetles.

    The presence of this beetle in front of you tells you that not
    everything went according to plan.  The released beetles showed
    little interest in hanging around the low yield gold mines - they
    quickly migrated to dangerous dungeons where tasty golden nuggets
    abound.  Worse yet, the mechanism used to digest gold triggers a
    powerful allergy in flesh and blood creatures, one that makes them
    unable to stand the presence of gold.

MOB::ICESNAKE - ice snake
    This small serpent is more at home in glaciers than a dungeon.
    Its bite can still inflict frostbite reminiscent of such
    glaciers, so be warned.

MOB::GREENSNAKE - green snake
    This small snake usually has smaller prey in mind than humans.
    Nonetheless, one should be wary of its poisonous bite, and leave
    it to live by its own whim.

MOB::FIRESNAKE - fire snake
    A snake measuring 30 to 50 centimeters in length with scales
    coloured in an impressive red and yellow pattern.  Many people in
    the surface world value the scales for the creation of
    fancy-looking boots.  If it weren't for the snake's fiery bite,
    this demand could have spelt its extinction.

MOB::MOUSE - mouse
    Small mice scurry anywhere that food scraps may be found.  To the
    novice, their movement may seem chaotic and random.  The skilled
    mouser learns to anticipate their every move.

    As a Hero on a Great Quest, you surely don't care about becoming a
    better mouser.

MOB::RAT - rat
    Rats live where humans live.  That doesn't stop humans from hating
    them.  While excuses like "spreaders of filth and disease" are
    usually provided, the cynical point out that if rats had nice
    bushy tails rather than ugly naked tails, the cohabitation may
    have been more peaceful.

MOB::GIANTRAT - giant rat
    This is a BIG rat.  It likely weighs as much as you do!

    Giant rats generally hate humans.  While excuses like "spreaders of
    filth and disease" are usually provided, the cynical point out that
    if humans had nice fur covering their bodies rather than being
    almost entirely naked, the cohabitation may have been more
    peaceful.

MOB::GRIDBUG - grid bug
    *kzzap*

    The grid bug is dismissed by most as just another type of vermin.
    However, scholars often have wondered at the origins of these
    purple xs.  Why is it that they crackle with electric power?  Are
    they some form of electric elemental?  What grants them the
    ability to move in directions unavailable to anyone else?  Do they
    come from some higher dimension where more degrees of freedom are
    present?  Barbarians report that the corpses are spicy if eaten
    fresh.

MOB::SHITOMI - shitomi
    The friendly shitomi is a large rat with lavender fur.  The
    shitomi's pleasant disposition endears most dungeon goers and only
    the most rabid would seek to do battle.

MOB::TRICERATOP - triceratops
    The triceratops is a long extinct animal.  As such, what we know
    about it comes from the occasional fossilized bones.  The size
    and strength of these bones suggests a powerful creature.  No doubt 
    it also had a cruel and barbaric demeanour - living, as it did, in 
    the pre-civilised jungles of antiquity.

    In summary: if you should see such a beast, make sure you attack 
    first!  And do try to preseve the corpse as the scientific community
    will appreciate the research material.

MOB::LUX - lux
    Rheo the Book Eater was named after his voracious appetite for
    books.  He would read an entire library in a fortnight.  He soon,
    however, became frustrated with the poor lighting afforded by
    torches.  Light spells tended to be static to an area, not at all
    helpful to a wandering mage like Rheo.

    Being a mage of no little power, he felt there must be a better
    solution.  He first constructed what he called a desk lamp - a
    metal stand with an articulated arm holding a permanent light
    source.  This could be carried about and adjusted to illuminate
    any book.  Not satisfied, he continued tinkering.  First, he
    granted the lamp locomotive ability so it could hop behind him and
    carrying would no longer be necessary.  He next provided the
    ability for the lamp to reproduce itself (thus saving on eventual
    manufacturing costs).  Finally, he added the ability for the lamp
    to orient itself to its master's eyes.

    Sadly, a bright light oriented at your eyes tends to blind you.
    Too late, he realized he should have had it point itself to what
    its master was looking at.  He never got the chance to correct
    the mistake since his only sample blinded him and hopped away
    before he recovered.

    Since then, the lux, as it has come to be known, has eked out an
    existence in the underworld.  Despite its rather aggressive
    nature, it is largely tolerated as a good source of light.

MOB::PURPLESLUG - purple slug
    The purple slug is both bigger and more ferocious than the brown
    slug.  Its acid is stronger so unprepared adventurers should take
    advantage of its slow speed and run away.

MOB::BROWNSLUG - brown slug
    The lowest of the giant slugs is the brown slug.  It uses a mild
    acid to defeat its foes and then scrapes up the partially digested
    remains with its radula.

MOB::DEATHSLUG - death slug
    The dreaded Death Slug is the next stage of the Purple Slug's
    growth.  A hideous horn has grown from its forehead with which it
    can impale attackers.  Those who think their acid resistance means
    they can ignore all slugs end up unpleasantly surprised.

MOB::FLOATINGEYE - floating eye
    A floating eye is aptly named.  It is a 50 centimeter diameter
    floating eyeball.  Thankfully, it has lids that cover the back
    half, so it is not too disgusting to see.

    Some theorize the first floating eye was a Distance Seeing spell
    that went awry.  This does not explain why those that try to hit
    the eye in melee often find themselves paralysed by its gaze.

MOB::WIZARDSEYE - wizard's eye
    While it is generally believed that the floating eye is a result
    of a magic experiment, it wasn't until Pqar the Prudent developed
    the wizard's eye spell that there was any proof.  Her spell was
    created by studying the existent floating eyes so possess the same
    unusual attack ability.  She further augmented the summoned
    creatures by shifting their phase so they can float through solid
    stone - all the better for spying.

MOB::GELATINOUSCUBE - gelatinous cube
    The gelatinous cube is a large cube of semi-transparent jelly.
    One can often see the shape of incompletely dissolved items inside
    the cube.

    Cubes blindly scour the dungeon, eating anything metallic.  When
    they grow to sufficient size, they split into two smaller cubes.
    Attackers should be wary of the paralyzing nature of the acid
    splash that is produced by piercing their skin.

MOB::SCORPION - scorpion
    The scorpion is renowned for its powerful sting.  Crushing the
    scorpion does no good if you die shortly after from the poison of
    its sting.

MOB::CAVESPIDER - cave spider
    The small inoffensive cave spider is often targeted by adventurers
    for the nutritious and tasty meat it provides.  Care is advised that
    a hungry adventurer not mistake it for its giant kin.

MOB::GIANTSPIDER - giant spider
    This spider is bloated with the unmentionable contents of its previous
    meals.  Care is cautioned lest you be the next victim to be liquified
    and sucked into its gullet.

MOB::KIWI - kiwi
    The kiwi, native to New Zealand, is peculiar in that it is not just a
    flightless bird, but a wingless bird as well.  Its nocturnal habit
    allows it to live peacefully in the depths, feasting on insects
    snuffled out with its long beak.  Antagonizing the kiwi is strongly 
    discouraged for that same snout can inflict a devastating piercing
    attack.

MOB::BAT - bat
    Explorers of dungeon depths should be thankful for bats for their part
    in minimizing the buzzing insects that would otherwise mar the 
    spelunking adventure.  Naysayers point out that bats do most of their
    hunting outside of the cave and leave more than enough guano within
    the cave to mitigate any beneficial effect they might have.

    It is said that only by carefully sifting through and washing bat
    guano can one acquire enough mosquito eyes to make the famed mosquito
    eye soup.  This tidbit of knowledge leaves unanswered the question
    of why one would desire such a soup in the first place.

MOB::LARGEBAT - large bat
    Unsurprising, where there are bats, there will be bigger bats.
    Those who have grown accustomed to feasting on bats are warned that
    while there is more meat on these bones, there is also more fight.
    
MOB::VAMPIREBAT - vampire bat
    Blood sucking vampire bats traditionally acquire their nutrients from
    sleeping cattle.  You may have noticed the lack of bovines in the
    dungeons.  Sleep tight!

MOB::STALKER - invisible stalker
    Ever have the feeling that someone was watching you?  And turned around
    suddenly to confront the watcher only to see no one?  Someone may still
    be watching you.  Someone invisible.  With fangs.  That drip acid.

MOB::FROG - frog
    The large cave frog swiftly hops through the tunnels looking for a pond to
    call its own.  A wise adventurer will not try to get in its way.  An unwise
    adventurer will form the frog's next snack.

MOB::SKELETON - skeleton
    What is dead should stay dead!  Why then do these bones move?  No
    ligaments connect the joints.  No muscles power the motion.  Yet
    these facts do not prevent the skeleton from clacking inexorably
    forward.

MOB::ZOMBIE - zombie
    The dead bloated corpse twitches.  An effect of rigor mortis setting in?
    No.  It is the vile necromantic art animating the corpse, transforming
    the decaying meat into a shambling undead monstrosity.

MOB::GHAST - ghast
    Twisted hunchbacked bipeds, ghasts are dreadful undead that swipe at
    foes with their noxious claws.  Some warriors have been known to leave
    weapons for ghasts to pick up in the hope that they can face a mere
    sword rather than the claws.

MOB::LICH - lich
    Powerful necromancers dissatisfied with the limitations of mortality
    can perform a complicated ritual to transform themselves into
    the undead lich.  In their new form they fear not the concerns
    that once plagued them.

MOB::SOULSUCKER - soul sucker
    Adventurers who escape the deepest levels of the dungeon report of
    hideously powerful creatures.  One that haunts the memory of any
    who hears of it is the dreaded soul sucker.  Most creatures
    imperil only your physical body, but the soul sucker can use
    necromantic magic to absorb your soul!

    If you are so unfortunate as to suffer this fate, you will find
    yourself without memory of any of the hard-earned skills or spells
    that you had acquired.  Worse yet, the soul sucker will have
    gained those spells in turn and will show no hesitation in using
    them against you!

MOB::IMP - imp
    Much like cockroaches infest all human habitations, imps infest 
    all infernal habitations.  From the slightly-balmy upper circles
    of hell where the merely slightly-not-good dwell, down to the 
    fiery deeps where dwell the truly evil, explorers have reported the
    presence of imps.

    Rather than try and exterminate imps directly, the daemons instead have
    devised summoning spells to bring imps in as cannon fodder.

MOB::KOBOLD - kobold
    Kobolds are a small purple-furred race of bipedal dogs.  Their 
    pack-like tendencies and cunning nature compensates for their weak 
    stature.

MOB::KOBOLDMAGE - kobold mage
    In Wpark the Wonderful's youth he believed that the kobold species
    held great promise.  It was only their lack of higher knowledge
    that prevented them from being accepted as equals among civilized
    nations.  He set out on a pilgrimage to teach the kobolds the
    wisdom of the world.

    While Wpark has refused to ever speak of his experiences, it was
    only after then that blue-robed kobold mages began to terrorize
    the underworld.  Their use of modern magic spells and wearing of
    the signature blue wizard robe suggest Wpark may have been at
    least partly successful.

MOB::KOBOLDASSASSIN - kobold assassin
    "There are many scurrilous lies spread about the noble kobold race.  
    The most ridiculous is surely that of the so-called Kobold 
    Assassin.  Every so often, I hear reports of one of these kobold
    subtypes.  The report usually describes them as black clad members
    of a secret kobold organization that will stop at nothing to
    defend kobold kind and keep themselves secret.

    "Every time I try and track down the originators of these reports, 
    the primary witness is always conveniently away on some long term 
    business trip, or has gotten himself killed in some tragic
    accident.  The lack of any first hand accounts proves that the
    Kobold Assassin is nothing more than hearsay spread to discredit
    kobold kind."

    From an early journal of Wpark the Wonderful.

MOB::KOBOLDFIGHTER - kobold fighter
    While any kobold is willing to pick up a sword to take what they
    desire, kobold fighters are more likely to be already be properly
    equipped and trained in such weapons.  Many adventurers that had
    come to scorn kobolds received a harsh lesson in manners from an
    affronted kobold fighter.

MOB::KOBOLDTHIEF - kobold thief
    The highest caste in kobold society belongs not to the warriors who bravely
    defend the warrens against intrusion, but to the thieves that use sneaky
    subterfuge to extract treasure from other civilizations for the benefit of
    kobold-kind.  Those encountering the kobold thief should keep a close eye
    on their valuables or they may win the fight only to lose their wallet.

MOB::TROLL - troll
    The brutish nature of a troll cannot be understated.  They attack
    with clumsy, but devastating, force.  They have thick skins able
    to withstand the sharpest barbs.  And the worst part?  When you
    finally think you have killed them... they come back!

MOB::CAVETROLL
    When Prakal the Earth Mage was faced with a large band of trolls,
    he did what seemed reasonable to him at the time.  A few quick
    casts of petrify would, he thought, result in a nice addition to
    his museum of curiosities.  Unfortunately, the powerful
    regenerative nature of trolls prevailed over even Prakal's potent
    magics.  The trolls were petrified into stone.  Being made of
    stone didn't make them any more tractable, however.

    Unfortunately for the world at large, Prakal took the better part
    of valour and ran away.  This left the stone trolls to breed and
    multiply into what are now properly termed as Cave Trolls.

MOB::LIZARDMAN - lizardman
    The cold blood of a lizardman seems to lead to cool thinking.
    Lizardmen show no mercy to the weak.  Their native habitat is the
    swamplands of the surface world, but they have adapted well to the
    underground depths.

MOB::TURTLOID - turtloid
    The thick armour shell of these turtle people makes them
    formidable opponents in a fight.

MOB::LARGETURTLOID - large turtloid
    It is said that turtloids never die of old age, but instead just
    keep growing to ever larger sizes.  Perhaps it is a good idea to
    slay them when they are still only this small?

MOB::ORC - orc
    The filthy orcs are disdained by all species that have developed a
    language sophisticated enough to include the word "disdain".

MOB::HILLORC - hill orc
    Native to the hills of Abr'po, the vicious hill orc is often used
    as a scape goat for any local problems.  Indeed, most army leaders
    of Abr'po enlist a token hill orc squad.  At the end of combat,
    the hill orc squad is accused of all the various war crimes that
    occurred and summarily executed.  Scholars debate if the fact that
    hill orcs still eagerly apply for such positions is a sign of
    their lack of mental acuity or overriding desire to commit war
    crimes.

MOB::HEADLESS - headless
    The origin of these abominations is unknown.  Well, it is pretty
    clear that some mad wizard was responsible, but WHICH mad wizard
    remains in doubt.  Rheo the Book Eater certainly wouldn't have had
    the foresight to provide them with a crude form of telepathy to
    compensate for their lack of eyes.  Wpark the Wonderful's
    fascination with the colour puce rules him out - he'd have surely
    dyed their hide.  And Treska of the Seven Alphabets?  Her prudish
    nature would have ensured there was no second generation of
    headlesses to terrorize the world.

MOB::CHAMELEON - chameleon
    This rather large lizard is a distant cousin of the more familiar
    desert dwelling chameleon.  Exposure to powerful magic forces
    seems to have amplified its colour shifting ability into the
    ability to adopt the form of almost any creature!  Be warned it
    gains the creature's special powers when it transforms.  A large
    number of dungeoneers thus advocate destroying chameleons before
    they have a chance to change into something even more frightening.

MOB::LIVINGTREE - animated tree
    While pedants are quick to point out that all trees are animate - one
    glance at the destruction wrought by the roots of an oak should settle the
    skeptical - those who have witnessed a true animate tree feel there is an
    important distinction between the slow inexorable growth of normal trees
    and these creatures.  The most obvious difference is that it is a lot
    harder to run away from an animate tree!

    There is good news for adventurers beset by tree problems.  The animate
    trees are the result of a spell that hastens the natural life forces.  When
    the spell's power is used up the trees will revert once again to the
    pleasant shade-giving plants one is used to.

MOB::EARTHELEMENTAL - earth elemental
    Hailing from the elemental plane of Earth, these fearsome foes
    threaten all but the strongest adventurers.  Their bodies, made
    from the very dirt animated, can absorb tremendous damage.  Their
    attacks will shock the most stalwart.

MOB::AIRELEMENTAL - air elemental
    We often take the air for granted.  We breathe and walk through
    this fluid without thinking of the force it represents.  The
    destructive power of air elementals swiftly remind adventurers
    that the most insubstantial of things still hurts if it hits you
    hard enough.
    
    By controlling the movement of airborne dust, and hence the
    friction between the airborne dust, air elementals can create
    massive charge disparities.  These ground themselves with
    devastating lightning bolts.

MOB::FIREELEMENTAL - fire elemental
    Staring into the flame of a candle can grant you enlightenment.
    Staring into the flame of an fire elemental can grant you a swift
    death.

MOB::WATERELEMENTAL - water elemental
    One of the most feared elementals, water elementals combine an
    extraordinary strength with a truly sinister attack.  When hit by
    a water elemental, one takes little direct damage.  A part of the
    elemental dislodges itself, however, and blocks your trachea.  Many
    a brave adventurer has met a miserable death by drowning despite
    having slain the elemental.

MOB::FLESHGOLEM - flesh golem
    Anyone can take a mound of flesh and fashion it in a crude mockery
    of a biped.  The trick is to get it to walk under its own power.
    While golems themselves possess no soul or life, it is said that
    necromancers who make them require a soul of a creature to power
    the animation process.

MOB::STONEGOLEM - stone golem
    A stone golem consists of a collection of ten to twenty boulders.
    Strange magics can be seen flickering between the boulders,
    holding them into a vaguely man like shape.  No soul or life is
    detectable in the resulting creation, but it is rumoured that one
    was consumed to power their creation.

MOB::IRONGOLEM - iron golem
    The grinding of gears and clanking of metal precedes the arrival
    of an iron golem.  Wise adventurers use the warning to flee.
    Unwise adventurers die.

MOB::GHOST - ghost
    Death, they say, is but the start of a new journey.  Some, it
    would seem, are not yet interested in that new journey, but remain
    in this world to plague the living.

    Ghosts are the incorporeal souls of the restless dead.  They
    possess a hatred of those who still enjoy the feel of fresh air.
    
    Warriors tell of trying to fight ghosts, but being overcome by
    fright at their hideous appearance, or finding that their weapons
    seemed to have no effect.

MOB::LIVINGFROST - living frost
    A cloud of super cooled air glares at you menacingly.  You are not 
    sure how a mere cloud of ice crystals can glare.  And you are equally
    unsure how said cloud keeps moving relentlessly towards you.  These
    are not the questions you should be asking yourself, however.  You
    should instead be wondering how you will survive long enough to
    see the frost dissipate.

MOB::ELDER - village elder
    An old woman. bent double with age, who is well respected in the
    local village for her wisdom.  She is the one that led you to the
    cave when you volunteered to defeat the evil within.  No doubt she
    can now lead you back where hopefully celebrations await!

MAGICDOOR::NOTENOUGHDOORS - not enough doors
    The magical door radiates a sense of loss.  You have the eerie
    feeling that the local dungeon is incomplete.  It seems unlikely
    you will be opening this door on this adventure.

MAGICDOOR::NOITEMS - no items to consume
    As you try to open the magical door, a verse suddenly enters your
    mind.  "Wands, Rings, Scrolls, and Potions.  Four of each and no
    more.  Place with utmost symmetry.  And much knowledge will be
    thine."  You mutter under your breath at the appalling lack of
    meter.

MAGICDOOR::INSUFFICIENTITEMS - not enough items consumed
    As you watch your magical items disappear into the aether, you
    wonder if what is hidden by this door is worth the trouble?
    Hopefully a pattern emerges before you must sacrifice your useful
    items.

MAGICDOOR::SUCCESS - door opens
    As the last item vibrates, the purple glow fades from the door.
    Tentatively, you try the handle.  The door, it seems, is no longer
    magical, and easily opens to your push.  You hope Belweir has not
    sent you on a wild goose chase.

SIGNPOST_GBA::WELCOME
    Welcome to the Tutorial!

    Press up and down to scroll through this message.  Faster scrolling can
    be done by [R] and [L].  You've read it all when the arrows
    disappear at the bottom.

    Buttons on the Gameboy Advance (GBA) are placed in [Square]
    brackets.  [A] and [B] are on the front and labelled.  [L] and [R]
    are the shoulder buttons on the far side of the GBA.  [Start] and
    [Select] are the small buttons labelled as such.  On the DS, [X]
    and [Y] can be used instead of [Start] and [Select].  The DS also supports
    the touch screen - POWDER can be played with the stylus only.  Special
    stylus hints will be provided at the end of these help descriptions.

    When you have menus visible you can select the current entry with
    [A].  To cancel the menu hit [B].

    The first task is to move!  You can move in four directions, up,
    down, left, and right by pressing the directional pad.

    Stylus: Clicking on the screen will also cause you to move in that
    direction.  You can hold down the stylus to keep moving in the desired
    direction.  You do not need to hit the adjacent tile either.

    Now move down the hallway to the next signpost!

SIGNPOST_GBA::MINIMAP
    Help and Minimap
    ----------------

    While playing you can get help.  Hit [Start] to bring up the
    Command menu.  Choose Options... The Options... menu has a Help
    choice.

    As you explore the dungeon you reveal more of the map.  You can
    press and hold [R] to view a minimap to see what you have
    explored.  Your location is a white square.  Up and down stair
    cases are green squares.

    Stylus: The bottom of the screen has a row of action buttons.  There are
    buttons for Help and Minimap there.

SIGNPOST_GBA::LOOK
    Look and History
    ----------------

    Hit [Start] and choose Look.  This puts you in look mode that lets
    you scroll around.  Selecting a monster with [A] will provide
    detailed information about that monster.

    Hit [Start] and choose History.  This brings up the history of
    messages you have received.

    Stylus: The eyeball engages look mode.  To stop looking, select the current
    cursor position.  The history on the DS is in the top window.

SIGNPOST_GBA::BOULDER
    Boulders
    --------

    Boulders are too large to pick up but can be pushed through the
    dungeon.  If you get yourself stuck behind a boulder, you can Swap
    places with it.  First, remove your equipped items using the
    inventory screen.  Hit [Start] and choose Swap.  After choosing the
    direction of the boulder, you will swap places with it.

    Note you can also swap with friendly monsters.

    Stylus: The Swap command is on the action bar.  Note that to push a boulder
    you must click on the tile adjacent to you - it will not be pushed in run
    mode.

SIGNPOST_GBA::MELEE
    Combat
    ------

    Behind this door is a fearsome foe!

    Attacking an enemy with your equipped weapon is simple.  Just walk
    into it!  Note that tame or friendly creatures won't be attacked
    this way - you will instead swap positions.

    Adventuring can make one hungry.  If a corpse is left you will be
    prompted to eat it when you walk over it.  Be warned that you are
    what you eat.

    Stylus: You need to click on the creature when it is adjacent to attack -
    if you click past the creature you will just stop moving.

SIGNPOST_GBA::INVENTORY
    Inventory
    ---------

    While you start the adventure not wearing anything, that doesn't
    mean you are empty handed.  You have some equipment in your
    inventory!

    Hit [Select] to bring up the inventory screen.  Use the cursor to
    target the chain mail.  Hit [A] to bring up the context menu.
    Select Equip.  Target the body slot and hit [A] to put the
    chainmail on your body.

    Stylus: The brown bag action bar icon brings up the inventory screen.  When
    you select an item, the action bar reflects things you can do with it.  The
    fully dressed person means equip.

SIGNPOST_GBA::PICKUP
    Pick Up
    -------

    Look!  Some earlier adventurer has left an item on the dungeon
    floor!  All the better to equip yourself with!

    Walk over the longsword.  You will be prompted to pick it up.
    Then use [Select] to bring up your inventory and to equip it in
    your Main Hand.

SIGNPOST_GBA::DOOR
    Doors
    -----

    Passages in the dungeon can be blocked by simple wooden doors.
    Opening is straightforward: walk into the door and you will try
    and open it.  If at first you don't succeed, try, try again!

    Stylus: You need to click on the door when standing beside it - clicking
    past the door will have you stop at the door.

SIGNPOST_GBA::USE
    Item Use
    --------

    Three different items are here.  What sort of items is a mystery.
    They could be beneficial or dangerous.  The easiest way to learn
    is by trial!

    Pick up the items by walking over them.  Use [Select] to bring up
    your inventory and select the items with [A].  Try to Drink the
    potion, to Zap the wand, and to Read the scroll.

SIGNPOST_GBA::WATER
    Water
    -----

    Your way forward is blocked by a large pool of water.  Without
    some magical assistance, you will likely sink in the water if you
    walk on it.  When underwater you will take drowning damage until
    you resurface.  You can try and return to the surface by walking
    back onto land.

    You can explicitly climb out of water or up an down staircases
    with [Start] followed by Climb.

    Stylus: The ladder action bar icon performs Climb.

SIGNPOST_GBA::SEARCH
    Secret Doors
    ------------

    This room would seem to be a dead end.  However, not everything is
    as it seems.

    Press [Start] to bring up the Command menu.  You could hit [A] on
    Search to search once.  Instead, hit [L] on Search.  This will
    bind [L] to Search.  Then repeatedly press [L] while standing by
    the walls of this room to search for secret doors.

    Note that almost any entry of the Command menu can be bound to [L]
    or [R] in this way.  To bind to [A] or [B] hit [Select] over the
    command and then [A] or [B].  The bottom of the status line
    provides hints as to the currently bound commands.  After binding
    search, the far left will change from M to s.

    Stylus: Click on yourself to search.

SIGNPOST_GBA::SPELLS
    Spells and Skills
    -----------------

    As you explore the dungeons of POWDER you will encounter books
    that hold powerful skills and arcane spells.  To unlock these,
    first pick up the book by walking on it. Then raise your inventory
    with [Select].  Select the book and choose the Read option to
    learn what skills and spells are possible.

    When you are reading a book you can hit [A] to try and learn the
    current skill or spell.  It may have prerequisites that prevent
    you from learning it just yet.  [B] will stop reading.  [Select]
    will bring up help on that specific spell.

    There is a maximum number of skills you can know based on your
    physical level and a maximum number of spells based on your
    mental level.  These levels increase when you gain 1000
    experience.  The amount they increase depends on the god you pick.

    You can free up spells and skills by the Forget command.  [Start]
    for the Command menu and select Forget.

    Skills take effect automatically so you do not need to explicitly
    invoke them.

    Spells can be cast by hitting [B] provided you have enough magic
    points for the spell.

    Stylus: The lightning bolt icon casts a spell.  The Forget command can be
    found on the Command menu which is the > icon on the action bar.

SIGNPOST_GBA::DIP
    Dipping Items
    -------------

    You can dip items into potions.  This can be useful to discover
    the property of the potion or to apply some effect to the item.

    Pick up the long sword and potion.  [Select] for the inventory screen,
    and then select the long sword with [A].  Choose the Dip from the
    menu.  Then pick the potion and select it as the target.  Most
    likely, nothing will happen.

SIGNPOST_GBA::QUIVER
    Quivering Ammo
    --------------

    You can throw individual items by [Select] to the inventory
    screen, selecting the item with [A], and choosing the Throw
    command from the menu.  You will then pick a direction.  You can
    throw in 10 directions.  In addition to the movement directions,
    you can throw along the four diagonals.  You can also throw up and
    down by selecting the square two squares up or two squares down
    from you.  Be warned that things that are thrown upwards tend to
    fall back down.

    This process can get tedious, however.  Instead you can quiver
    items that you want to throw often.  [Select] to inventory, select
    your item, and pick Quiver.  A q will appear beside the item to
    mark it as quivered.  Quivered items have the dequiver option to
    undo this.

    To throw a quivered item hit [A] and choose a direction.

    Note that when you walk over items that were quivered you will
    automatically pick them up without taking a turn.

SIGNPOST_GBA::DARK
    Darkness
    --------

    Not all of POWDER is well lit.  Many areas are dark, only allowing
    you to see your immediate surroundings.  Light sources can be
    invaluable in mapping these areas faster and ensuring you get the
    jump on foes, rather than the other way around.
    
SIGNPOST_GBA::DRAGONS
    Dragons
    -------

    Here be dragons!
    
SIGNPOST_GBA::WONTUTORIAL
    The whole point of those dragons was to ensure you would die.  I
    had thought I had put enough in there.  Clearly, I underestimated
    either your skill or persistence.  Or maybe both.

    It is not recommended that you let me know you read this.  I will
    probably just respond by adding more dragons.
    
    - Jeff Lait

SIGNPOST_GBA::KIWI
    Down this corridor is one of the most feared of creatures: the
    kiwi!  This fear is misfounded as the kiwi is a peaceable sort that
    will only attack if provoked.

    Sometimes you may find your way blocked by a kiwi.  If waiting
    isn't an option, you can try and swap places.  Hit [Start] and
    choose Swap.  Then select the direction of the kiwi to switch
    places peacefully.

    If you look at a creature and it isn't described as hostile, there
    is no need to attack it as it will leave you alone.

SIGNPOST_GBA::WON
    WARNING: Cave may contain the ultimate evil, Baalz'bub.

    NOTE: Entrance has a magic one-way seal to prevent anything from
    escaping.  Anything includes you!

SIGNPOST_SDL::WELCOME
    Welcome to the Tutorial!

    Press up and down to scroll through this message.  Faster scrolling can
    be done with [Page Up] and [Page Down].  You've read it all when
    the arrows disappear at the bottom.

    Keypresses are written inside square brackets.  Note that the case
    matters - to hit [S] for swap you must use shift-s.  POWDER can also be
    played entirely with the mouse.  Special mouse hints are at the end of
    these help sections.

    When you have menus visible you can select the current entry with
    [Enter].  To cancel the menu hit [Escape].

    The first task is to move!  You can move in four directions, up,
    down, left, and right by pressing the cursor keys.

    Mouse: Clicking on the screen will also cause you to move in that
    direction.  You can hold down the stylus to keep moving in the desired
    direction.  You do not need to hit the adjacent tile either.

    Now move down the hallway to the next signpost!

SIGNPOST_SDL::MINIMAP
    Help and Minimap
    ----------------

    While playing you can get help.  Hit [?] to bring up the help menu.

    As you explore the dungeon you reveal more of the map.  You can
    hit [m] to view a minimap to see what you have explored.  Your
    location is a white square.  Up and down staircases are green
    squares.

    Mouse: The bottom of the screen has a row of action buttons.  There are
    buttons for Help and Minimap there.

SIGNPOST_SDL::LOOK
    Look and History
    ----------------

    Hit [x].  This puts you in look mode that lets you scroll around.
    Selecting a monster with [Enter] will provide detailed information
    about that monster.  Select yourself to see your current state.

    Hit [v].  This brings up the history of messages you have received.

    Mouse: The eyeball engages look mode.  To stop looking, select the current
    cursor position.

SIGNPOST_SDL::BOULDER
    Boulders
    --------

    Boulders are too large to pick up but can be pushed through the
    dungeon.  If you get yourself stuck behind a boulder, you can Swap
    places with it.  First, remove your equipped items using the
    inventory screen.  Hit [S] (shift-s).  After choosing the direction
    of the boulder, you will swap places with it.

    Note you can also swap with friendly monsters.

    Mouse: The Swap command is on the action bar.  Note that to push a boulder
    you must click on the tile adjacent to you - it will not be pushed in run
    mode.

SIGNPOST_SDL::MELEE
    Combat
    ------

    Behind this door is a fearsome foe!

    Attacking an enemy with your equipped weapon is simple.  Just walk
    into it!  Note that tame or friendly creatures won't be attacked
    this way - you will instead swap positions.

    Adventuring can make one hungry.  If a corpse is left you can hit
    [e] to eat it.  Be warned that you are what you eat.

    Mouse: You need to click on the creature when it is adjacent to attack -
    if you click past the creature you will just stop moving.

SIGNPOST_SDL::INVENTORY
    Inventory
    ---------

    While you start the adventure not wearing anything, that doesn't
    mean you are empty handed.  You have some equipment in your
    inventory!

    Hit [i] to bring up the inventory screen.  Use the cursor to
    target the chain mail.  Hit [Enter] to bring up the context menu.
    Select Equip.  Target the body slot and hit [Enter] to put the
    chainmail on your body.

    Mouse: The brown bag action bar icon brings up the inventory screen.  When
    you select an item, the action bar reflects things you can do with it.  The
    fully dressed person means equip.

SIGNPOST_SDL::PICKUP
    Pick Up
    -------

    Look!  Some earlier adventurer has left an item on the dungeon
    floor!  All the better to equip yourself with!

    Walk over the longsword.  Hit [g] to pick up the sword.
    Then use [i] to bring up your inventory and to equip it in
    your Main Hand.

    Mouse: The action bar has a pickup command.

SIGNPOST_SDL::DOOR
    Doors
    -----

    Passages in the dungeon can be blocked by simple wooden doors.
    Opening is straightforward: walk into the door and you will try
    and open it.  If at first you don't succeed, try, try again!

    Mouse: You need to click on the door when standing beside it - clicking
    past the door will have you stop at the door.

SIGNPOST_SDL::USE
    Item Use
    --------

    Three different items are here.  What sort of items is a mystery.
    They could be beneficial or dangerous.  The easiest way to learn
    is by trial!

    Pick up the items by walking over them and hitting [g].  Use [i]
    for your inventory and select the items with [Enter].  Try to
    Drink the potion, to Zap the wand, and to Read the scroll.

SIGNPOST_SDL::WATER
    Water
    -----

    Your way forward is blocked by a large pool of water.  Without
    some magical assistance, you will likely sink in the water if you
    walk on it.  When underwater you will take drowning damage until
    you resurface.  You can try and return to the surface by walking
    back onto land.

    You can also climb out of water or up and down staircases with [>]
    and [<].

    Mouse: The ladder action bar icon performs Climb.

SIGNPOST_SDL::SEARCH
    Secret Doors
    ------------

    This room would seem to be a dead end.  However, not everything is
    as it seems.

    Repeatedly press [s] while standing by the walls of this room to
    search for secret doors.

    Mouse: Click on yourself to search.

SIGNPOST_SDL::SPELLS
    Spells and Skills
    -----------------

    As you explore the dungeons of POWDER you will encounter books
    that hold powerful skills and arcane spells.  To unlock these,
    first pick up the book by walking on it and hitting [g]. Then
    raise your inventory with [i].  Select the book and choose the
    Read option to learn what skills and spells are possible.

    When you are reading a book you can hit [Enter] to try and learn the
    current skill or spell.  It may have prerequisites that prevent
    you from learning it just yet.  [Escape] will stop reading.  [i]
    will bring up help on that specific spell.

    There is a maximum number of skills you can know based on your
    physical level and a maximum number of spells based on your
    mental level.  These levels increase when you gain 1000
    experience.  The amount they increase depends on the god you pick.

    You can free up spells and skills by hitting [F] (shift-f) for the
    Forget command.

    Skills take effect automatically so you do not need to explicitly
    invoke them.

    Spells can be cast by hitting [z] provided you have enough magic
    points for the spell.

    Mouse: The lightning bolt icon casts a spell.  The Forget command can be
    found on the Command menu which is the > icon on the action bar.

SIGNPOST_SDL::DIP
    Dipping Items
    -------------

    You can dip items into potions.  This can be useful to discover
    the property of the potion or to apply some effect to the item.

    Pick up the long sword and potion.  Hit [i] for the inventory
    screen and select the long sword with [Enter].  Choose the Dip
    command from the menu.  Then pick the potion and select it as the
    target.  Most likely, nothing will happen.

SIGNPOST_SDL::QUIVER
    Quivering Ammo
    --------------

    You can throw individual items by [i] to the inventory
    screen, selecting the item with [Enter], and choosing the Throw
    command from the menu.  You will then pick a direction.  You can
    throw in 10 directions.  In addition to the movement directions,
    you can throw along the four diagonals.  You can also throw up and
    down by selecting the square two squares up or two squares down
    from you.  Be warned that things that are thrown upwards tend to
    fall back down.

    This process can get tedious, however.  Instead you can quiver
    items that you want to throw often.  [i] to inventory, select
    your item, and pick Quiver.  A q will appear beside the item to
    mark it as quivered.  Quivered items have the dequiver option to
    undo this.

    To throw a quivered item hit [f] and choose a direction.

    Note that when you walk over items that were quivered you will
    automatically pick them up without taking a turn.

SIGNPOST_SDL::DARK
    Darkness
    --------

    Not all of POWDER is well lit.  Many areas are dark, only allowing
    you to see your immediate surroundings.  Light sources can be
    invaluable in mapping these areas faster and ensuring you get the
    jump on foes, rather than the other way around.
    
SIGNPOST_SDL::DRAGONS
    Dragons
    -------

    Here be dragons!
    
SIGNPOST_SDL::WONTUTORIAL
    The whole point of those dragons was to ensure you would die.  I
    had thought I had put enough in there.  Clearly, I underestimated
    either your skill or persistence.  Or maybe both.

    It is not recommended that you let me know you read this.  I will
    probably just respond by adding more dragons.
    
    - Jeff Lait

SIGNPOST_SDL::KIWI
    Down this corridor is one of the most feared of creatures: the
    kiwi!  This fear is misfounded as the kiwi is a peaceable sort that
    will only attack if provoked.

    Sometimes you may find your way blocked by a kiwi.  If waiting
    isn't an option, you can try and swap places.  Hit [S] (shift-s)
    and select the direction of the kiwi to switch places peacefully.

    If you look at a creature and it isn't described as hostile, there
    is no need to attack it as it will leave you alone.

SIGNPOST_SDL::WON
    WARNING: Cave may contain the ultimate evil, Baalz'bub.

    NOTE: Entrance has a magic one-way seal to prevent anything from
    escaping.  Anything includes you!

SIGNPOST_iPOWDER::WELCOME
    Welcome to the Tutorial!

    Tap the top and bottom to scroll through this message.  
    You've read it all when the arrows disappear at the bottom.

    There are three buttons on screen, a green [A], red [B], and a blue
    directional pad.  [A] usually means Okay, [B] means Cancel, and the
    directional pad are the four directions.

    When you have menus visible you can select the current entry with
    [A].  To cancel the menu hit [B].

    The first task is to move!  You can move in four directions, up,
    down, left, and right by pressing the directional pad or tapping
    on the screen.  Tapping on yourself will search in place.

    Now move down the hallway to the next signpost!

SIGNPOST_iPOWDER::MINIMAP
    Help and Minimap
    ----------------

    While playing you can get help.  Hit ? button to bring up the help menu.

    As you explore the dungeon you reveal more of the map.  There is a map
    button you can press to bring up the mini map.  Your
    location is a white square.  Up and down staircases are green
    squares.

SIGNPOST_iPOWDER::LOOK
    Look and History
    ----------------

    Tap the eyeball.  This puts you in look mode that lets you scroll around.
    Selecting a monster and tapping [A] will provide detailed information
    about that monster.  Select yourself to see your current state.

    Tap the clock.  This brings up the history of messages you have received.

SIGNPOST_iPOWDER::BOULDER
    Boulders
    --------

    Boulders are too large to pick up but can be pushed through the
    dungeon.  If you get yourself stuck behind a boulder, you can Swap
    places with it.  First, remove your equipped items using the
    inventory screen.  Then tap the swap button.  After choosing the direction
    of the boulder, you will swap places with it.

    Note you can also swap with friendly monsters.

    Note that to push a boulder by tapping on the screen you you tap click on
    the tile adjacent to you - it will not be pushed in run mode.

SIGNPOST_iPOWDER::MELEE
    Combat
    ------

    Behind this door is a fearsome foe!

    Attacking an enemy with your equipped weapon is simple.  Just walk
    into it!  Note that tame or friendly creatures won't be attacked
    this way - you will instead swap positions.  If you are using the
    directional pad, attacking is the default.  If you are tapping on the
    screen to move, you will only attack if you tap directly on an adjacent
    monster.

    Adventuring can make one hungry.  If a corpse is left you can accept
    the auto-prompt to eat it.  Be warned that you are what you eat!

SIGNPOST_iPOWDER::INVENTORY
    Inventory
    ---------

    While you start the adventure not wearing anything, that doesn't
    mean you are empty handed.  You have some equipment in your
    inventory!

    Tap the bag to bring up the inventory screen.  Use the cursor to
    target the chain mail.  Hit [A] to bring up the context menu.
    Select Equip.  Target the body slot and hit [A] to put the
    chainmail on your body.

SIGNPOST_iPOWDER::PICKUP
    Pick Up
    -------

    Look!  Some earlier adventurer has left an item on the dungeon
    floor!  All the better to equip yourself with!

    Walk over the longsword.  Accept the auto-prompt to pick up the sword.
    Then use the bag button to bring up your inventory and to equip it in
    your Main Hand.

SIGNPOST_iPOWDER::DOOR
    Doors
    -----

    Passages in the dungeon can be blocked by simple wooden doors.
    Opening is straightforward: walk into the door and you will try
    and open it.  If at first you don't succeed, try, try again!

    If tapping on the screen to move, note that you will only attempt
    to open the door if you tap directly on an adjacent door.

SIGNPOST_iPOWDER::USE
    Item Use
    --------

    Three different items are here.  What sort of items is a mystery.
    They could be beneficial or dangerous.  The easiest way to learn
    is by trial!

    Pick up the items by walking over them and accepting the prompt.  Tap the
    bag for your inventory and select the items with [A].  Try to
    Drink the potion, to Zap the wand, and to Read the scroll.

SIGNPOST_iPOWDER::WATER
    Water
    -----

    Your way forward is blocked by a large pool of water.  Without
    some magical assistance, you will likely sink in the water if you
    walk on it.  When underwater you will take drowning damage until
    you resurface.  You can try and return to the surface by walking
    back onto land.

    You can also climb out of water by selecting the Climb command
    from the command menu (> button), or by adding a Climb action button.

SIGNPOST_iPOWDER::SEARCH
    Secret Doors
    ------------

    This room would seem to be a dead end.  However, not everything is
    as it seems.

    Repeatedly press the door-with-question mark button while standing by the
    walls of this room to search for secret doors.

SIGNPOST_iPOWDER::SPELLS
    Spells and Skills
    -----------------

    As you explore the dungeons of POWDER you will encounter books
    that hold powerful skills and arcane spells.  To unlock these,
    first pick up the book by walking on it and accepting the autoprompt. 
    Then raise your inventory with bag button.  Select the book and choose the
    Read option to learn what skills and spells are possible.

    When you are reading a book you can hit [A] to try and learn the
    current skill or spell.  It may have prerequisites that prevent
    you from learning it just yet.  [B] will stop reading.  

    There is a maximum number of skills you can know based on your
    physical level and a maximum number of spells based on your
    mental level.  These levels increase when you gain 1000
    experience.  The amount they increase depends on the god you pick.

    You can free up spells and skills by using the Forget action.  You can use
    this from the Command Menu (> button) or by creating a the Forget action
    button.

    Skills take effect automatically so you do not need to explicitly
    invoke them.

    Spells can be cast by hitting the lightning bolt button provided you have
    enough magic points for the spell.  Note you can also create spell buttons
    to simplify the casting process.

SIGNPOST_iPOWDER::DIP
    Dipping Items
    -------------

    You can dip items into potions.  This can be useful to discover
    the property of the potion or to apply some effect to the item.

    Pick up the long sword and potion.  Tap the bag button for the inventory
    screen and select the long sword with [A].  Tap the Dip
    command from the menu, this is the potion with the downward arrow.  Then
    pick the potion and select it as the target.  Most likely, nothing will
    happen.

SIGNPOST_iPOWDER::QUIVER
    Quivering Ammo
    --------------

    You can throw individual items by going to the inventory
    screen, selecting the item with [A], and choosing the Throw
    command from the menu.  You will then pick a direction.  You can
    throw in 10 directions.  In addition to the movement directions,
    you can throw along the four diagonals.  You can also throw up and
    down by selecting the square two squares up or two squares down
    from you.  Be warned that things that are thrown upwards tend to
    fall back down.

    This process can get tedious, however.  Instead you can quiver
    items that you want to throw often.  Go to inventory, select
    your item, and pick Quiver.  A q will appear beside the item to
    mark it as quivered.  Quivered items have the dequiver option to
    undo this.

    To throw a quivered item tap the bow button from the main screen and choose
    a direction.

    Note that when you walk over items that were quivered you will
    automatically pick them up without taking a turn.

SIGNPOST_iPOWDER::DARK
    Darkness
    --------

    Not all of POWDER is well lit.  Many areas are dark, only allowing
    you to see your immediate surroundings.  Light sources can be
    invaluable in mapping these areas faster and ensuring you get the
    jump on foes, rather than the other way around.
    
SIGNPOST_iPOWDER::DRAGONS
    Dragons
    -------

    Here be dragons!
    
SIGNPOST_iPOWDER::WONTUTORIAL
    The whole point of those dragons was to ensure you would die.  I
    had thought I had put enough in there.  Clearly, I underestimated
    either your skill or persistence.  Or maybe both.

    It is not recommended that you let me know you read this.  I will
    probably just respond by adding more dragons.
    
    - Jeff Lait

SIGNPOST_iPOWDER::KIWI
    Down this corridor is one of the most feared of creatures: the
    kiwi!  This fear is misfounded as the kiwi is a peaceable sort that
    will only attack if provoked.

    Sometimes you may find your way blocked by a kiwi.  If waiting
    isn't an option, you can try and swap places.  Tap the swap button
    and select the direction of the kiwi to switch places peacefully.

    If you look at a creature and it isn't described as hostile, there
    is no need to attack it as it will leave you alone.

SIGNPOST_iPOWDER::WON
    WARNING: Cave may contain the ultimate evil, Baalz'bub.

    NOTE: Entrance has a magic one-way seal to prevent anything from
    escaping.  Anything includes you!

TALK::ELDER - village elder
    So the omens were true!  You have defeated the great evil in the cave.
    Not just those of the village, but the whole kingdom can sleep better
    now.

    Your strength and tenacity in the face of incredible odds should be
    celebrated!

    I have just such a celebration prepared at the village.  When you
    are ready I can lead you there.

